bickley Alas, Tatyana's fading quickly;
bickley Her soul, unmoved, grows wan and sickly;
bickley Onegin, though, is fading quickly;
bickley Of one consumptivewan and sickly.
alerting He'd only teased her with some flirting,
center's As all applaud, Onegin enters
advice A word of warning should suffice.
advice A Moscow winter would be nice.
advice Is often easy, even nice.
advice The winter road is smooth as ice.
advice Like you and me, to being nice?
bestowing Your interest piqued and doubtless growing
bestowing I might describe in terms more knowing
bestowing Then read and read frustration growing:
bestowing When scarce a boy and not yet knowing
bestowing He'd been entranced by Olga growing
bestowing And soon the fragrant tea was flowing
bestowing As Olga poured it, dark and glowing,
bestowing Each pane a fragile pattern showing;
bestowing And all the hilltops soft and glowing
bestowing Her dream disturbs her, and not knowing
bestowing Tatyana seeks some passage showing
bestowing And long she stood, bewitched and glowing,
agleam How self-oblivious he could seem!
agleam And merely as an idle scheme,
agleam And introduced a new regime.
agleam The endless dance had come to seem
agleam They glower coldly as they scheme
agleam That little girl whose warm esteem
bursey And country dress would find no mercy;
bursey From every Moscow fop and Circe!
alongs When we sing our secret songs,
abhorrent And worked her way across the torrent
advises Steel files and combs in many guises,
advises Straight scissors, curved ones, thirty sizes
advises But hush! A strident critic rises
advises Of elegy in all its guises
advises The sudden gust of wind surprises
advises His eyes aflame, Onegin rises
auer But was he happy in the flower
auer Amid his conquests of the hour?
auer He sang the rose, romantic flower,
auer Of silence at a lonely hour;
auer And deep within her rustic bower,
auer A valley-lily come to flower
auer For thus our giddy race gains power:
auer And we as well shall face that hour
auer By dreams of him; each passing hour
auer The world itself with magic power
auer Nor see that noxious worm devour
auer When it has yet to fully flower.'
auer Calls out his name!No earthly power
auer The storm has blown; the lovely flower
auer And some few novels done with power,
auer Can she have solved the riddle's power?
auer She hardly notes how late the hour,
auer How sad that youth, with all its power,
auer That we betrayed it every hour,
auer 'I'm weeping. . . . Oh, at this late hour,
auer Then know that were it in my power,
auer For me to struggle at this hour;
auer The die is cast: I'm in your power,
broward Throughout the house the ceilings towered,
broward From walls ancestral portraits glowered;
broward The sceptic Bayle he quite devoured,
broward The works of Fontenelle he scoured;
bringing It's where I find . . . ''More pastoral singing!
bringing Enough, old boy, my ears are ringing!
bringing But now her door is softly swinging:
bringing To drive the cows outside with ringing;
bringing Inside her hut a girl is singing,
bringing In bottle with the pitch still clinging,
adine Clarissa, Julia, or Delphine.
borys And she was not the sort who glories
borys In girlish pranks; but grisly stories
borys Would light the way with secret stories!
borys How oft, mid far Caucasia's glories,
adjust For rooting in the ancient dust
adjust Of history's annals full of must,
adjust Before that soft and simple trust,
adjust Before that soul so bright and just!
adjust For all lies veiled in misty dust.
adjust No matter; fate's decree is just;
bevan In summer he'd get up by seven
abridge The chasm's banks atop the ridge:
abridge A perilous and shaky bridge;
berling Poor Lensky's muddled mind was swirling,
blouse And almost even left her spouse;
blouse But then she took to keeping house
abided Onegin was, so some decided
abided (Strict judges, not to be derided),
abided Eugene and I had both decided
abided But all too soon our paths divided,
abided As sentiments to be derided,
abided She checked her funds and then decided,
assistance I'll say without wrought-up insistence
assistance To share my baneful, sad existence,
assistance Slow Lethe, then, with grim insistence,
assistance Will drown my memory's brief existence;
assistance 'Shall we begin?' 'At my insistence.'
assistance Still pleasanter is mute insistence
caccamise 'As God's my witness, dear, I promise.'
abs There Ozerov received the nation's
abs Was quite the pedant in his dress
abs And what we called a fop, no less.
abs Do you now clothe in sacred dress?'
abs Made meetings dull at one another's;
abs As gay as morning's rosy dress,
abs Awakened early none the less,
abs By candlelight she'd rise and dress.
abs Her hero . . . who was none the less
abs No Grandison in Russian dress.
abs I'll never know. But none the less,
abs I give it here in feeble dress:
abs Alas, it isn't hard to guess!
abs Coursed on and never ceased to press
abs Or kiss the border of her dress.
abs And then he'd dress. . . .
abs Yet neither Virgil's, nor Racine's,
abs And man of honour, nothing less:
abs Thus does our age its sins redress!
abs Three bottles daily from Vry's.
abs And Ialas, I must confess
abs Pursue her now a good deal less.
abs Amid its park. In sombre dress
abs Napoleon, drunk with fresh success,
abs (On meeting her at some dull aunt's)
abs I know you'll feel a deep distress
abs Your haughty glance may well express!
above He did at last give up his love
above Of pistol, sword, and ready glove.
above With her old friend. 'My little dove,
above 'Oh, let me be now . . . I'm in love.'
above It's not your mind I'm talking of,
above I'm thinking of Onegin, love;
above He pens a lyre . . . and then a dove,
above Adds colour lightly and with love;
above 'Oh, tell me, do, Tatyana love,
above Who was it you were dreaming of?'
above And rushed to greet her rhyming love
beater That made her sister's beauty sweeter
chimes And, oh, how many jests and rhymes,
chimes And arguments, and happy times!
allying And sure enough a note came flying;
allying Onegin's uncle, sick and dying,
allying In heaven's peaceful desert flying,
allying That queen of secrets and of sighing.
allying The day wore on, no word came flying.
allying All dressed since dawn, dead-pale and sighing,
allying And was it you I heard replying
allying Or when I helped the poor and dying,
allying Or turned to heaven, softly crying,
allying You'd start to weep, but all your crying
allying So judge yourself what we'd be buying,
allying While 'neath her downy pillow lying,
allying The bottle pops as cork goes flying;
allying And now with solemn mien, and dying
congestion When just the master's least suggestion. . . .'
congestion 'Oh, nanny, please, that's not the question,
alone ' Exist no more; for we've outgrown
alone Of youthful ecstasies unknown,
alone She lacked that fresh and rosy tone
alone We lack, I know, a worldly tone,
alone Would be the bride I'd make my own.
alone To turn at last to lifeless stone
alone 'And here's the hearth,' spoke up the crone,
alone And read the books he'd called his own.
alone 'What can I do? Tatyana's grown,'
alone Just like the moon upon her throne,
alone Is what we like and call our own?
alone That poor enamoured girl he'd known
alone Absorbed his soul... as he was shown:
alone Base cowards, slanderers full-blown,
alone Unfaithful women he had known,
alone And Benedetto he'd intone
alone And you, my true ideal, my own!
alone In whose bright company I've known
along While far away some rousing song
along To whom amid the jealous throng
along Do you today devote your song?
along And then I'll write this world a song
along That's five and twenty cantos long!
along At least one note to linger long,
along Recalling, like some friend, my song.
along For starters (tell me if I'm wrong),
along A simple Russian family throng;
along Strike you up a rousing song,
along To read to her for whom you long:
along The very object of your song,
along Foretells a death to come ere long,
along And girls prefer 'The Kitty's Song.'
along As you, great Homer, you whose song
along Has lasted thirty centuries long!
along As heeding passion's siren song
addictions 'My uncle, man of firm convictions . . .
buckled The crafty husband fawned and chuckled
brimmer And sparkling in the sunlight's shimmer,
brimmer A clump of snow will fall and glimmer.
adjusts But we must grant, though it offend us:
adjusts Enlightenment has failed to mend us,
adjusts Never come to spy on us
adjusts Arriving home together thus
adjusts Where no one raised the slightest fuss:
adjusts (But aren't they one, if they offend us?)
adjusts But from our friends, dear God, defend us!
adjusts Who won't sow slander all about us?
adjusts Who'll coddle us and never doubt us?
adjusts Can tell the time without great fuss:
adjusts The stomach serves as clock for us;
adjusts Just so! The tomb that lies before us
adjusts And with a smile the world caressed us;
adjusts The old Derzhavin saw and blessed us,
chipper And from one charming foot her slipper,
abolition Mark how the world compels submission:
abolition Gone blind with tears, in full submission,
abolition All other days they've our permission
abolition Of both young girls with superstition;
abolition And rightly so: in inquisition,
abolition He found much wrong in his position:
abolition My pen has lost its disposition
abolition Concealing her wrought-up condition,
abolition But, taking leave, requests permission
abolition When our old roads' decayed condition
abolition Will change beyond all recognition.
abolition She likes the stately disposition
abolition Their chilly pride in high position,
abolition (A most unfortunate condition
abolition I fear that in this meek petition
abounded Now the mazurka's call is sounded.
alois Recall Moi'na . . . and rejoice
alois That everyone has heard his voice.
alois O Brenta! I shall yet rejoice,
alois I hear at last your magic voice!
alisky Ai I find is much too risky,
alisky A is like a mistress frisky,
addresses When basic products it possesses.
addresses For country freedom too possesses
addresses Both others' and their own successes,
addresses The beauties in their filmy dresses,
addresses The swarming gallery throng that presses,
benter The doors fly back; two figures enter
benter The guests all squeeze toward the centre,
apprehensive A wild creature, sad and pensive,
bloody And once inside that silent study,
appeasing But all that foamy, frothy wheezing
appeasing The squires face each other wheezing;
abloom All this adorned his dressing room,
abloom Our sage of eighteen summers' bloom.
abloom And all the monsters fled the room;
abloom With him amid the frosty gloom.
abloom The crowd moves on to drawing room:
abloom A noisy swarm, to meadow bloom.
abloom And brilliant day begin to bloom;
abloom The secret refuge of the tomb. . . .
abloom At everything around the room;
abloom A painful joy that lifts her gloom
bluth Was in his prime - a handsome youth
bluth And poet filled with Kantian truth.
bluth And so he killed eight years of youth
bluth And lost life's very bloom, in truth.
bluth And is there no return of youth?
bluth Shall I be thirty soon, in truth?
bluth Compares with our own fading youth,
bluth For which no spring will come, in truth?
aborn While life was still but in its morn
aborn Blind fortune's malice and men's scorn.
aborn So we in fancy then were borne
aborn Back to our springtime's golden morn.
aborn The villager to rise. It's morn!
aborn My Tanya, though, is so forlorn.
aborn And in the country he'd have worn
aborn A quilted gown and cuckold's horn,
aborn Two hearts, perhaps, remain forlorn
aborn And mourn him yet. . . . But wherefore mourn?
achieving By joining him at least in grieving,
achieving And blind as ever, still believing,
achieving Yes, he was loved . . . beyond deceiving . . .
achieving Oh, blest is he who lives believing,
achieving He felt it break with desperate grieving.
baek To keep his wicked tongue in check,
baek And thought: What foolishness to wreck
clyatt Some moments passed in utter quiet,
beholder On my long work as I grow older!
beholder Enough! The burden's off my shoulder!
beholder But when the years have made us older,
beholder Thus storms in autumn, blowing colder,
fatiguing And friends and friendship less intriguing;
acceded I've drawn a plan and know what's needed,
acceded Some even knowingly conceded
acceded The stylish rings the couple needed.
acceded But now it's over. Supper's heeded.
acceded To servants' quarters. Rest is needed
acceded Of course not all his pranks succeeded
acceded Or passed unpunished or unheeded,
acceded But my Eugene all evening heeded
apprehensions No plaything of the mob's conventions
adjourn Thus heaven wills the world to turn.
adjourn The molten wax submerge and turn
adjourn Among the pines would gently turn
adjourn Upon a bough above that urn;
adjourn Was given us in vain, to burn;
adjourn And were deceived by it in turn;
adjourn And here ... at this unhappy turn
aligned The ladies' gowns so well designed;
aligned I love their feet - although you'll find
aligned Yet wasn't, like so many, blind;
aligned Had someone else for whom she pined
aligned A man whose heart and soul and mind
aligned As phantom daydreams haunt your mind:
aligned On every side you seem to find
aligned Mistakes in grammar charm the mind.
aligned Perhaps (if fate should prove unkind!)
aligned For this your ardent spirit pined
aligned When you, with so much strength of mind,
aligned Can Fate indeed be so unkind?
aligned That our good friend was only kind
aligned A noble heart and upright mind.
aligned A worthy object! Never mind,
aligned A truer love you'll never find.
aligned His poet's soul, his artist's mind;
aligned With every tribute he can find:
aligned By pictures of this simple kind,
aligned And nothing grand or more refined.
aligned As dark forebodings filled her mind
aligned Of some misfortune ill defined.
aligned For several days she couldn't find
aligned A way to calm her troubled mind.
aligned Two pine trees grow there, roots entwined;
aligned Beneath them quiet streamlets wind,
aligned She's stifled here . . . and in her mind
aligned Calls up the life she left behind
aligned And malice rules a petty mind?
aligned Because in tripe the solemn find
aligned Du comme il faut. . . (Shishkov, be kind:
aligned I can't translate this phrase, I find.)
aligned I thought: in freedom, peace of mind,
aligned A substitute for joy I'd find.
aglow The cry resounds: 'Make way! Let's go!'
aglow Is silver bright with frosted snow.
aglow Still fidget, freezing, in the snow,
aglow And coachmen by the fire's glow
aglow All this I now can let you know,
aglow Upon our mournful northern snow.
aglow You loved instead to come and go
aglow Crackling the freshly fallen snow;
aglow The cabby plods to hackney row.
aglow It speaks to me in words I know.
aglow On soft Italian nights I'll go
aglow She loved to greet Aurora's show,
aglow Against the heavens' pallid glow,
aglow This fragile life that hurries so!
aglow And I'm not loathe to let it go;
aglow You lover of the Muse's art, O
aglow A fervent author used to show
aglow Endowed with bright perfection's glow.
aglow About the olden days . . . you know,
aglow As cold and chaste as winter snow;
aglow Impossible for mind to know;
aglow To take this note of mine to O —    —    —  ,
aglow Our neighbour, nurse, the one. . . you know!
aglow Across the misted panes a row
aglow Of hallowed letters: E and O.
aglow Her cheeks retain their blazing glow
aglow And ever brighter, brighter grow.
aglow Evokes some pity for my woe,
aglow You won't abandon me, I know.
aglow Ripe red currants let us throw!
aglow And in the morning he won't know
aglow What evening holds or where he'll go.
aglow For few will understand you so,
aglow And innocence can lead to woe.'
aglow Forgive me, but it's true, you know,
aglow I love my dear Tatyana so!
aglow Though why they do, I hardly know).
aglow But listen as our friends speak low:
aglow With winter's brilliant rug of snow
aglow The world all fresh and white below.
aglow Feel frightened tooso let it go,
aglow We'll not have Tanya conjure so.
aglow All wet, comes off in crumbly snow;
aglow And now she feels her kerchief go,
aglow There's bear and blizzard, bridge, and crow,
aglow Fir, forest, hedgehog, night, and snow,
aglow A maiden somewhat ripe in glow,
aglow My Tambov poet takes in tow;
aglow My youth betrayed, it's time to show
aglow More common sense if I'm to grow,
aglow He's hardly worth contempt, I know,
aglow But fools will whisper . . . grin . . . and crow! . . .'
aglow To Olga, he would whisper low:
aglow 'I'm happy, love . . . it's true, you know.'
aglow And if it is, who wants to know?)
aglow He climbs aboard and off they go.
aglow They reach the mill. He bids Guillot
aglow 'Why here he is: Monsieur Guillot,
aglow Will be quite pleased to greet, I know;
aglow The jagged flints are set to go.
aglow Behind a nearby stump Guillot
aglow It's pleasant to provoke a foe;
aglow His stubborn, thrusting horns held low
aglow The modish beauty's modish foe,
aglow That recluse from the world we know
aglow And chase from nearby hills the snow,
aglow To inundate the fields below.
aglow Let's trace a winding brooklet's flow
aglow Beside a spot where lindens grow.
aglow Its legend lets the stranger know:
aglow 'Vladimir Lensky lies below.
aglow Beside the couple's coach below,
aglow Then sadly saw the lovers go.
aglow She spied a distant hamlet's glow,
aglow A manor house and grove below,
aglow For books had vanished, as we know,
aglow Some works and authors even so:
aglow She doesn't greet the winter's glow,
aglow Inhale the frostdust, gather snow
aglow Look Tanya over good and slow;
aglow Examine her from head to toe.
aglow To spy on Tanya down below
aglow From boxes rising row on row.
aglow That stranger no one seems to know?
aglow Before him faces come and go
aglow He's gulled the world . . . now let it go.'
aglow 'You know him then?' 'Well, yes and no.'
aglow It's hard to bear (as you well know)
aglow Perceive you as a freak on show,
aglow 'But tell me, Prince, you wouldn't know
aglow She does not bid him rise or go,
aglow From avid lips that press them so.
aglow Until at last she whispered low: '
aglow Enough; get up. To you I owe
aglow (All futures seemed alike in woe)
aglow I married. . . . Now I beg you, go!
berth Eugene alone could see his worth;
berth Of neighbours' feasts and rounds of mirth;
berth You cherished dreams of sacred worth
bierer Steps out of doors and trains a mirror
bierer Unwillingly within the mirror,
announcing Elated by the music's bouncing,
announcing His tea and rum at once renouncing,
f The daring satirist Fonvizin,
f Of ancient customs unforgot.
f 'I couldn't sleep ... O nurse, it's stifling!
f 'What ails you, Tanya?'' Life's so trifling,
f And ploughs a trail of fluffy furrows;
f Malvina for three roubles fifty
f (A broken set, but he was thrifty);
f Here's Petushkv, the district fop;
f And former couns'lor, old man Flynov,
f Past urchins, street lamps, strolling fops,
f Past diplomats and soldier-fops,
arunachalam That semi-light, so pale and solemn,
arunachalam The iron bust upon its column
arunachalam Commotion, bows . . . the glad, the solemn . . .
arunachalam Between two aunts, beside a column,
closing Her head is bowed, as if she's dozing;
closing Her light chemise has slipped, exposing
closing On melting snow as if he's dozing
beijing And beats an iridescent wing
beijing When captured by some boy in spring;
beijing Sees through a crack the strangest thing
beijing A horde of monsters in a ring:
beijing Takes up his pen. . . . His verses ring
beijing With all the nonsense lovers sing;
beijing Within a dream to which we cling,
beijing Some other and more ancient spring,
beijing My Tanya's conquest taking wing,
beijing Lest I forget of whom I sing
beijing As storms refresh the fields of spring.
bewitch Above a tambour to enrich
bewitch A linen cloth with silken stitch.
bewitch They spade up silver from a ditch!
bewitch The one we sing to will be rich
blips While yet a foreign language slips
blips With native glibness from their lips?
delivers Just so a hare in winter shivers,
delivers And snorts in fear, the traveller shivers
delivers Gone numb with terror, Tanya shivers . . .
accept Where first I loved, where first I wept,
accept And where my buried heart is kept.
accept And by the moonlit grave they kept
accept Their vigil and, embracing, wept.
accept The household keys she always kept.
accept The girl whose letter he still kept
accept In which a maiden heart had wept;
beckoned Anisya came in just a second,
aerospatiale The little girl with docile doll
abort A learned, if pedantic, sort.
abort Is held in high esteem at Court?
abort Or would my fall perhaps be sport,
admires A beetle hummed. The peasant choirs
bonet Then afterwards, as was his wont,
abjured Nor was it that she much preferred
abjured You're still my little early bird!
abjured Last night you scared me, 'pon my word!
abjured My name, or breathe a single word. . . .
abjured ''But who's it for, my little bird?
abjured Onegin was profoundly stirred:
abjured A swarm of thoughts with every word;
abjured Whose head is never fancy-stirred,
abjured Who hates all gestures, each warm word,
abjured Just lies in bed without a word,
abjured Her tears well up without a word
abjured Behind the mill, without a word.
abjured And while the 'honest chap' conferred
abjured Some sacred truth, a living word,
abjured But not a trite or vulgar word,
abjured So here's his letter word for word.
buttered He turned at last and vaguely fluttered
buttered 'It's time for something new,' he muttered,
buttered The awful word, so lightly uttered,
chops Has struck at last: the poet stops
chops And silently his pistol drops.
chops By gardens, mansions, fashion shops;
chops And haughty dames . . . then calmly stops
beach Both love's and Petrarch's ardent speech.
beach An always bold, impassioned speech,
beach Indeed the poet's fervent speech,
beach Scarce breathing and bereft of speech,
beach It's my turn now to make a speech.
brown's That Paris of the local towns,
anoint Would touch obliquely on the point
anoint That bachelors' lives were out of joint;
beauty Again he'd done his moral duty,
beauty Tatyana (with a Russian duty
beauty A captive of his lot and duty,
beauty And I, who saw my single duty
beauty Of what, with fashion's sense of duty,
blotter Atop a lean and shaggy trotter
blotter The bearded postboy sits as spotter.
annexed Remote one moment, gay the next;
annexed Are ever thus; with brow perplexed,
annexed 'Zaretsky bit his lip, well vexed.
annexed Onegin turned to Lensky next:
abuse When she was small she didn't choose
abuse Or tell them all the city news.
abuse 'Why, sweetheart, anything you choose.'
abuse But see . . . Oh, nanny, don't refuse!'
abuse Afraid the scoundrel might refuse
abuse Or laugh it off and, through some ruse,
abuse In arid gossip, questions, news
blood No, never once did passion's flood
adin While muffled by the violin
adin The wives their jealous gossip spin.
adin Of kennels, and of distant kin,
adin Tatyana seemed among her kin
adin And talk all day once they begin.
adin We're put to sleep by talk of 'sin';
adin And even there it seems to win.
adin For two whole weeks to see my kin,
adin Within the witching webs we spin.
adin He's yours, he'll say, through thick and thin:
adin He loves you so! . . . Why, you're like kin!
adin Is surer far than friends or kin:
adin Survives when even tempests spin.
adin And from the hut come cries and din;
adin To face them; and amid the din,
adin To watch the brilliant ballroom spin.
adin So frisky-carefree with her grin,
adin She seemed the same she'd always been.
adin And gusting snowflakes flash and spin,
adin But still Onegin lies within
adin And fresh new linen from the bin.
adin 'Who would have thought?' 'How long it's been!'
adin 'Sit down. . . . How strange!... I can't begin . . .
adin And straightway too, to all her kin
baehr Martyn Zadck, Chaldean seer
a A due respect for his afflictions
a To tend a sick man night and day,
a Not daring once to steal away!
a And entertain the nearly dead,
a To fluff the pillows for his head,
a Ludmila's and Rusln's adherents!
a May I present, as we set sail,
a The hero of my current tale:
a Was born beside the Neva's span,
a Where maybe, reader, you began,
a His father ran up debts galore;
a He gave a ball some three times yearly,
a At first Madame was in attendance;
a To spare his charge excessive pain,
a Kept lessons light and rather plain;
a He seldom punished any lark,
a And walked the boy in Letny Park.
a Became in time our young man's fate,
a The age of hopes and tender yearnings,
a Monsieur l'Abb was shown the gate.
a And here's Onegin liberated,
a To fad and fashion newly mated:
a In French he could and did acutely
a And bows he'd mastered absolutely.
a We've all received an education
a So thank the Lord that in this nation
a Of free and easy conversation,
a Or in a grave dispute he'd wear
a The solemn expert's learned air
a And keep to silent meditation;
a The Latin vogue today is waning,
a And yet I'll say on his behalf,
a He had sufficient Latin training
a To gloss a common epigraph,
a Cite Juvenal in conversation,
a Put vale in a salutation;
a And he recalled, at least in part,
a A line or two of Virgil's art.
a Of anecdotes of ages past:
a From Romulus to Tuesday last.
a Lacking the fervent dedication
a He never knew, to our frustration,
a A dactyl from an anapest.
a I have no leisure for retailing
a The sum of all our hero's parts,
a But where his genius proved unfailing,
a The thing he'd learned above all arts,
a What from his prime had been his pleasure,
a His only torment, toil, and treasure,
a What occupied, the livelong day,
a His languid spirit's fretful play
a Was love itself, the art of ardour,
a Which Ovid sang in ages past,
a And for which song he paid at last
a By ending his proud days a martyr
a In dim Moldavia's vacant waste,
a Far from the Rome his heart embraced.
a Conceal his hopes, play jealous swain,
a Seem cast in gloom or mute with pain,
a Appear so proud or so forbearing,
a At times attentive, then uncaring!
a What languor when his lips were sealed,
a What fiery art his speech revealed!
a He lived, he breathed one single dream,
a And when he wished, he'd make appear
a The quickly summoned, glistening tear!
a And how he'd seize a moment's weakness
a At first he'd beg a declaration,
a And listen for the heart's first beat,
a Then stalk love faster and entreat
a A lover's secret assignation . . .
a And then in private he'd prepare
a In silence to instruct the fair!
a And when he found it necessary
a Until his valet brings his tray.
a There'll be a ball, a children's party;
a Where will he dash to, my good hearty?
a Where will he make the night's first call?
a Oh, never mind he'll make them all.
a But meanwhile, dressed for morning pleasure,
a Bedecked in broad-brimmed Bolivar,
a He drives to Nevsky Boulevard,
a He's off to Talon's, late, and racing,
a Quite sure he'll find Kavrin pacing;
a A bloody roast beef's on the table,
a And Strasbourg pie, that deathless fable;
a He's off!this critic most exacting
a Of all that touches art or acting,
a This fickel swain of every star,
a And honoured patron of the barre
a To join the crowd, where each is ready
a To hiss at Phdreso unsteady,
a Enchanted land! There for a season,
a As did derivative Knyazhnin;
a Unbidden tears and its ovations,
a Which young Semynova did share;
a And there the caustic Shakhovsky
a My goddesses! You vanished faces!
a Oh, hearken to my woeful call:
a Have other maidens gained your places,
a Yet not replaced you after all?
a Shall once again I hear your chants?
a Or see the Russian muse of dance
a Or shall my mournful gaze alight
a On unknown faces on the stages?
a And when across this world I pass
a A disenchanted opera glass,
a Shall I grow bored with mirth and rages,
a And shall I then in silence yawn
a The restless gallery claps and roars;
a The stalls and pit are all ajitter;
a The curtain rustles as it soars.
a Poised to the magic bow attendant,
a A throng of nymphs her guardian band,
a Istmina takes up her stand.
a One foot upon the ground she places,
a Like down from Eol's lips she races;
a Then spins and twists and stops to beat
a And treads on toes to reach his seat;
a He takes a single glance to measure
a These clothes and faces with displeasure;
a His eyes toward the stage and play
a Then yawned and turned his head away:
a Upon the stage still romp and roar,
a And while the weary band of servants
a And while the people still are tapping,
a Still sniffling, coughing, hissing, clapping;
a Still glitter grandly all about;
a Is dressed, undressed, and dressed again?
a And ships to us by Baltic seas
a Whatever Paris, seeking treasure,
a For luxury, for modish pleasure
a Imported pipes of Turkish amber,
a Fine china, bronzesall displayed;
a And purely to delight and pamper,
a Perfumes in crystal jars arrayed;
a Of brushes for the modern male
a For hair and teeth and fingernail.
a In this case, though, one has to say
a That Freedom's Champion went astray.
a For one may be a man of reason
a And mind the beauty of his nails.
a Why argue vainly with the season?
a For custom's rule o'er man prevails.
a His figure in the looking-glass;
a Then through his dressing room he'll pass
a In man's attire to pay a call
a At masquerade or midnight ball.
a That as it is my diction groans
a With far too many foreign loans;
a But let's abandon idle chatter
a And hasten rather to forestall
a Our hero's headlong, dashing clatter
a In hired coach towards the ball.
a One splendid house is all alight,
a But look, Onegin's at the gateway;
a He's past the porter, up the stair,
a Through marble entry rushes straightway,
a Then runs his fingers through his hair,
a And steps inside. The crush increases,
a The droning music never ceases;
a The guardsman clinks his spurs and dances,
a Enchanting creatures that entreat
a A hot pursuit of flaming glances;
a In days of dreams and dissipations
a No surer place for declarations,
a I pray you, heed my sound advice,
a Since I dropped sinning long ago.
a In following where pleasure calls!
a Yet were not morals ill affected
a I even now would worship balls.
a I love youth's wanton, fevered madness,
a The crush, the glitter, and the gladness,
a In what grim desert, madman, banished,
a Will you at last cut memory's thread?
a Ah, dearest feet, where have you vanished?
a What vernal flowers do you tread?
a For your sake smothered all my dreams
a All gone are youth's bright years of grace,
a As from the meadow your light trace.
a And Flora's cheek, I quite agree;
a It hints to probing, ardent glances
a Of rich rewards and peerless trances;
a O how I envied then the waves
a To fall about her feet like slaves!
a Upon those feet these lips . . . caressing.
a No, never midst the fiercest blaze
a Of wildest youth's most fervent days
a Was I so racked with yearning's anguish:
a Or sultry breast on which to languish.
a Another memory finds me ready:
a In cherished dreams I sometimes stand
a And hold the lucky stirrup steady,
a Then feel her foot within my hand!
a The blood within this withered heart:
a Once more the love . . . once more the dart!
a He drives to bed from last night's ball,
a Answers the drumbeat's duty call.
a In pleasant hubbub morn's awaking!
a The shutters open, smoke ascends
a The German baker's up and baking,
a And more than once, in cotton cap,
a Has opened up his window-trap.
a But wearied by the ballroom's clamour,
a This child of comfort and of glamour,
a By afternoon he'll finally waken,
a The day ahead all planned and taken:
a The endless round, the varied game;
a Tomorrow too will be the same.
a The very springtime of his days,
a Amid his pleasures and their blaze,
a Or was he profligate and hale
a Amid his feasts to no avail?
a And all those beauties, once appealing,
a Inconstancy grew too fatiguing;
a For after all he couldn't drain
a An endless bottle of champagne
a 'Twas this our hero had contracted;
a And though, thank God, he never acted
a To put a bullet through his head,
a His former love of life was dead.
a Like Byron's Harold, lost in trances,
a Through drawing rooms he'd pass and stare;
a Nor wanton sighs, nor tender glances
a No, nothing touched his sombre heart,
a He noticed nothing, took no part.
a Capricious belles of lofty station!
a For nowadays in our great nation,
a Discuss a Say or Benthamever;
a But generally, you'll have to grant,
a Their talk's absurd, if harmless, cant.
a So dignified, so awfully smart,
a So pious and so chaste of heart,
a So circumspect, so strict in bearing,
a Who late at night are whisked away
a In racing droshkies bound for pleasure
a Along the Petersburg chausse
a He dropped you too in sudden fashion.
a Apostate from the storms of passion,
a And tried to write. But art's exaction
a So thus he failed to join the faction
a A laudable and worthy goal.
a And when Eugene drew my attention,
a I liked his natural bent for dreaming,
a With passion's game we both were sated;
a The fire in both our hearts was pale;
a Our lives were weary, flat, and stale;
a And for us both, ahead there waited
a Within his soul must hold men small;
a The ghost of days beyond recall;
a And grim repentance gnaws his heart.
a All this, of course, can help impart
a Great charm to private conversation;
a I liked his caustic disputation
a How often in the summer quarter,
a Above the Neva's placid water
a The loves and intrigues of the past,
a Alive once more and free at last,
a We drank in silent contemplation
a To forest green and liberation,
a Filled with his heart's regrets, and leaning
a Eugene stood lost in pensive dreaming
a The night grew still. . . with silence falling;
a Only the sound of sentries calling,
a Some distant droshky's rumbling beat;
a A lonely boat would sail along,
a O Adriatic! Grand Creation!
a When, filled once more with inspiration,
a And she my willing lips will teach
a It's time, it's time! I bid her hail;
a I roam the shore, await fair weather,
a And beckon to each passing sail.
a Upon the crossroads of the sea?
a And land of harsh, forbidding places;
a To sigh for sombre Russia's spaces,
a To make the foreign tour we'd planned;
a For fate took matters into hand.
a The greedy horde demanding pay.
a Each to his own, or so they say.
a Eugene, detesting litigation
a And quite contented with his fate,
a Released to them the whole estate . . .
a With no great sense of deprivation;
a Would like to bid his heir adieu.
a He gave the message one quick reading,
a While thoughts of money filled his head.
a He was prepared like any craven
a To sigh, deceive, and play his part
a (With which my novel took its start);
a But when he reached his uncle's haven,
a With those who'd known the now deceased;
a Both friends and foes had come ahustling,
a True lovers of a funeral feast.
a They laid to rest the dear departed;
a Then, wined and dined and heavy-hearted,
a And here's Onegin lord and master
a Of woods and mills and streams and lands;
a A country squire, there he stands,
a That former wastrel and disaster;
a For two full days he was enchanted
a By sylvan shade that lay implanted
a And then he saw that country byways
a No cards, no balls, no poets' feats
a Were just as dull as city highways;
a But I was born for peaceful roaming,
a My lyre sings! And in the gloaming
a I give myself to harmless pleasures
a Each morning early I'm awake
a To wander by the lonely lake
a Sweet idleness! You have my heart.
a That set Eugene and me apart.
a For otherwise some mocking reader
a I too have gazed in rapt attention
a When cherished beings filled my dreams.
a My soul preserved their secret features;
a The Muse then made them living creatures:
a Just so in carefree song I paid
a My tribute to the mountain maid,
a And sang the Salghir captives' praises.
a 'For whom these sighs your lyre raises?
a 'Whose gaze, evoking inspiration,
a Rewards you with a soft caress?
a Whose form, in pensive adoration,
a And maddened pangs of love's refrain.
a Oh, blest is he who joins his pain
a The sacred ecstasy of art;
a Like Petrarch then, he calms the heart,
a I write . . . and want no more embraces;
a My straying pen no longer traces,
a It has its contradictions, clearly,
a And send these fruits of inspiration
a My spirit's own newborn creation!
a And earn me tribute paid to fame:
a Distorted readings, noise, and blame!
a Stood by a river. Far away
a Green meads and golden cornfields lay,
a Lit by the sun as it paraded;
a And cattle wand'ring o'er the lea;
a While near at hand, all dense and shaded,
a A vast neglected garden made
a A nook where pensive dryads played.
a For placid comfort and to last;
a The sense and taste of ages past.
a The drawing room had rich brocades
a And stoves of tile in many shades.
a All this today seems antiquated
a For he'd become so fully jaded,
a He yawned alike where'er he sat,
a In ancient hall or modern flat.
a The furnishings were plain but stable:
a A couch, two cupboards, and a table,
a And found in one a list of wages,
a Some fruit liqueurs and applejack,
a And in the next an almanac
a From eighteen-eight with tattered pages;
a A quittent at a modest rate;
a His peasants thanked their lucky fate,
a But thrifty neighbours waxed indignant
a Still others sneered or turned malignant,
a And everyone who chose to speak
a Called him a menace and a freak.
a At first the neighbours' calls were steady;
a But when they learned that in the rear
a Onegin kept his stallion ready
a So he could quickly disappear
a They took offence and, one and all,
a They dropped him cold and ceased to call.
a 'Must be a Mason; drinks, they say . . .
a Red wine, by tumbler, night and day!' '
a Another squire chose this season
a To reappear at his estate
a And gave the neighbours equal reason
a For scrutiny no less irate.
a From Gottingen with soulful yearning,
a Had carried back the fruits of art:
a A freedom-loving, noble heart,
a And raven locks of shoulder reach.
a Or chill corruption's deadly grasp,
a Of maiden's touch and friendship's clasp.
a A charming fool at love's vocation,
a He fed on hope's eternal ration;
a The world's fresh glitter and its call
a Still held his youthful mind in thrall;
a He knew a kindred soul was fated
a To join her life to his career,
a That even now she pined and waited,
a Expecting he would soon appear.
a Would one day shine upon our race
a And grant the world redeeming grace.
a Compassion, noble indignation,
a A perfect love of righteous ways,
a And fame's delicious agitation
a Had stirred his soul since early days.
a Beneath the skies of distant lands,
a From Goethe's and from Schiller's hands.
a He never shamed, the happy creature,
a The lofty Muses of his art;
a He proudly sang with open heart
a Sublime emotion's every feature,
a He sang of love, by love commanded,
a As clear as maiden thoughts, as candid
a He sang of parting and of pain,
a Of something vague, of mists and rain;
a He'd almost reached his eighteenth year.
a He fled their noisy congregations
a And found their solemn conversations
a Or hint of inner lyric grace;
a Both wit and brains were out of place,
a As were the arts of social dealing;
a Well-off. . . and handsome in addition,
a Young Lensky seemed the perfect catch;
a And so, by countryside tradition,
a They asked him round and sought to match
a Their daughters with this semi-Russian.
a And then, good God, she starts to bawl:
a 'Come to my golden chamber hall!'
a Had cordial hopes that he'd acquire
a And so they met like wave with mountain,
a Like verse with prose, like flame with fountain:
a Their natures distant and apart.
a At first their differences of heart
a They'd meet on horse each afternoon,
a Except of course ourselves alone.
a We all take on Napoleon's features,
a And millions of our fellow creatures
a And on the whole despised mankind,
a He smiled at Lensky's conversation.
a His gaze of constant inspiration,
a His mind, still vacillant in reach
a Let's grant to fevered youthful days
a Their youthful ravings and their blaze.
a The two found everything a basis
a The covenants of bygone races,
a And Good and Evil, Life and Fate
a On each in turn they'd ruminate.
a Would oft recite, his eyes ablaze,
a Brief passages from Nordic lays;
a Eugene, who'd fled their wild abuses,
a Who cooled off love with separation
a From pangs of jealous agitation;
a Who never risked his sound estate
a Upon a deuce, that cunning bait.
a When we at last turn into sages
a When passion's flame no longer rages,
a And all the yearnings in our breast,
a They stir our hearts and fan the flame.
a Just so a soldier, old and lame,
a Will strain to hear with bated breath
a The youngbloods' yarns of courting death.
a But flaming youth in all its madness
a Keeps nothing of its heart concealed:
a Its loves and hates, its joy and sadness,
a Are babbled out and soon revealed.
a Onegin, who was widely taken
a As one whom love had left forsaken,
a And so Eugene learned all about
a Ah yes, he loved in such a fashion
a As only poets, mad with passion,
a He knew one constant source of dreaming,
a One constant wish forever gleaming,
a One ever-present cause for pain!
a And neither distance, nor the chain
a Of endless years of separation,
a Nor yet the Muse, his true vocation,
a The torment of a heart in flames,
a And fondly watched her girlhood games;
a He'd shared her frolics with affection.
a Their fathers, who were friends, had plans
a To read one day their marriage banns.
a Beneath her parents' loving gaze,
a She blossomed in a maiden's ways
a She gave the poet intimations
a And, filling all his meditations,
a Drew forth his flute's first ardent moan.
a That lamp to which we've consecrated
a A thousand walks in evening's calm
a And countless tearsthe gentle balm
a Of secret torments unabated ....
a Forever modest, meek in bearing,
a Like any poet open, caring,
a As sweet as love's own soft caress;
a Her voice, her form, her graceful stance,
a Oh, Olga's every trait.... But glance
a And so, dear reader, grant me pause
a To plead her elder sister's cause.
a Her sister bore the name Tatyana.
a And we now press our wilful claim
a A tender novel with that name.
a Why not? I like its intonation;
a It has, I know, association
a With olden days beyond recall,
a With humble roots and servants' hall;
a Our taste in names is less than weak
a (Of verses I won't even speak);
a So she was called Tatyana, reader.
a And drew all eyes to her alone.
a Shy as a doe and apprehensive,
a She never learned to show affection,
a And oftentimes she'd sit all day
a In silence at the window bay.
a But pensiveness, her friend and treasure
a Through all her years since cradle days,
a By bringing dreams before her gaze.
a For every social admonition;
a But dolls were never Tanya's passion,
a To talk to them of clothes or fashion
a Young Olga's friends to spend the day,
a Tatyana never joined their play
a Or games of tag upon the heather;
a Upon her balcony appearing,
a When dancing stars are disappearing
a From early youth she read romances,
a And novels set her heart aglow;
a She loved the fictions and the fancies
a Of Richardson and of Rousseau.
a But still, in books he saw no harm,
a And, though immune to reading's charm,
a Deemed it a minor peccadillo;
a His wife herself, we ought to add,
a For Richardson was simply mad.
a It wasn't that she'd read him, really,
a That long ago she'd often heard
a Her Moscow cousin, Princess Laura,
a Go on about their special aura.
a She found a great deal more appealing;
a A gambler and a guards cadet.
a But then they led her to the altar
a And never asked if she agreed.
a To rule the house as autocrat,
a And life went smoothly after that.
a She pickled mushrooms for the fall,
a She made her weekly bathhouse call,
a She used to write, with blood, quotations
a To speak in singsong intonations,
a Would call Praskvya 'chre Pauline'.
a The corset, albums, chic relations,
a Were quite forgot; she bid adieu
a To all her foreign affectations,
a And yet her husband loved her dearly;
a His life flowed onquite calm and pleasant
a For hearty talk at evenfall,
a Just casual friends who'd often call
a To shake their heads, to prate and prattle,
a Some tea to whet their tittle-tattle;
a They held all ancient customs dear;
a Twice yearly too they did their fasting;
a Were fond of songs for fortune-casting,
a The people, yawning, in for prayer,
a They needed kvas no less than air,
a And thus they aged, as do all mortals.
a That death had opened wide its portals,
a He died at midday's break from labour,
a He was a kind and simple barin,
a The humble sinner Dmitry Larin
a A slave of God and Brigadier
a Restored to home and its safekeeping,
a And long he stood in sorrow aching;
a 'Poor Yorick!' then he murmured, shaking,
a 'How oft within his arms I lay,
a How oft in childhood days
a I'd play With his Ochkov decoration!
a To see the day!" ... In lamentation,
a And then with verse of quickened sadness
a He honoured too, in tears and pain,
a His parents' dust. . . their memory's gladness . . .
a Alas! Upon life's furrowed plain
a A harvest brief, each generation,
a By fate's mysterious dispensation,
a Arises, ripens, and must fall;
a Then others too must heed the call.
a It waxes, stirs, turns seething wave,
a Then crowds its forebears toward the grave.
a I've closed my eyes to phantoms gleaming,
a Yet distant hopes within me dreaming
a I live, I write not seeking fame;
a And yet, I think, I'd wish to claim
a May yet not drown in Lethe's sea;
a Will point my portrait out and plead:
a Accept my thanks and admiration,
a you whose mind shall know by heart
a The fleeting works of my creation,
a To pat the old man's laurelled head!
a 'The Larin place.'' What reckless daring!
a Good God, man, don't you find it wearing
a I've got the scene in mind so clearly:
a With lots of jam and talk to spare.
a On rain and flax and cattle care. . . .'
a 'Well, where's the harm ... the evening passes.'
a 'The boredom, brother, there's the harm.'
a 'Well, I despise your upper classes
a And like the family circle's charm;
a 'Let's go.' And so the friends departed
a That sometimes heavy, but good-hearted,
a Old-fashioned Russian welcome treat.
a The social ritual never changes:
a The hostess artfully arranges
a A drink of lingonberry flavour.
a With folded arms, along the hall,
a The maids have gathered, one and all,
a While in the yard their men reproach
a Onegin's taste in horse and coach.
a Now home's our heroes' destination,
a Let's listen to their conversation
a 'Why all these yawns, Onegin? Really!'
a 'Mere habit, Lensky.'' But you're clearly
a More bored than usual.'' No, the same.
a The fields are dark now, what a shame.
a Come on, Andryushka, faster, matey!
a These stupid woods and fields and streams!
a A simple but a nice old lady;
a 'But tell me, which one was Tatyana?'
a 'Why, she who with a wistful air
a All sad and silent like Svetlana
a Came in and took the window chair.'
a I'd choose the elder one instead
a Your Olga's look is cold and dead,
a As in some dull, Van Dyck madonna;
a Meanwhile . . . Onegin's presentation
a At Madame Larin's country seat
a Produced at large a great sensation
a And gave the neighbours quite a treat.
a And soon the general verdict ran,
a That Tanya'd finally found a man;
a Tatyana listened with vexation
a That with a secret exultation,
a And in her heart the thought was planted . . .
a Until at last her fate was granted:
a Long since her keen imagination,
a Long since her heart's sweet agitation
a Her eyes have opened . . . seen his face!
a And now, alas! . . . she lives attended
a All day, all night, in sleep's embrace
a But speaks of him. She cannot bear
a The way the watchful servants stare,
a Or stand the sound of friendly chatter.
a Immersed in gloom beyond recall,
a She pays no heed to guests at all,
a And damns their idle ways and patter,
a And now with what great concentration
a To tender novels she retreats,
a With what a vivid fascination
a Those figures fancy has created
a Her happy dreams have animated:
a And Werther, that rebellious martyr,
a All these our dreamy maiden's ardour
a Has pictured with a single grace,
a And seen in all. . . Onegin's face.
a And then her warm imagination
a Some favourite author's fond creation:
a Her secret passions, and her dreams.
a Another's joy, another's pain,
a She whispers in a soft refrain
a The letter she would send caressing
a With tender soul and manly grace,
a Intelligence and handsome face.
a And nursing noble passion's rages,
a And in the novel's final pages,
a Deceitful vice was made to pay
a And honest virtue won the day.
a But now our minds have grown inactive,
a Our novels too make vice attractive,
a It's now the British Muse's fables
a That lie on maidens' bedside tables
a Or gloomy Melmoth, lost and pleading,
a In saturnine romanticism.
a Will claim what happy days remain.
a Shall I in grim detail portray,
a But simply tell as best I may
a Their jealous torments, separation,
a Their tears of reconciliation;
a I'll make them quarrel yet again,
a I'll think up speeches tenderhearted,
a Recall the words of passion's heat,
a Of some fair mistress long departed
a My heart and tongue once used to soar,
a Tatyana, O my dear Tatyana!
a I shed with you sweet tears too late;
a You've now resigned to him your fate.
a And drink the draught of love's temptations,
a Retreats for happy assignations;
a The ache of love pursues Tatyana;
a Scarce-breathing lips grow still with yearning,
a Night falls; the moon begins parading
a Breaks out in mournful serenading.
a 'Well, what about it? Lord, it's ages. . .
a I must have known a thousand pages
a But nowadays I'm not so canny,
a I can't remember much of late.
a Oh, Tanya, it's a sorry state;
a I get confused . . . ''But tell me, nanny,
a Were you in love then, long ago?'
a 'Oh, come! Our world was quite another!
a 'Then how'd you come to marry, nanny?'
a 'The will of God, I guess .... My Danny
a Was younger still than me, my dear,
a And I was just thirteen that year.
a The marriage maker kept on calling
a I got so scared . . . my tears kept falling;
a And weeping, they undid my plait,
a Then sang me to the churchyard gate.
a 'And so they took me off to strangers ...
a 'Oh, nanny, life's so full of dangers,
a I'm on the verge of tears and wailing!'
a 'My goodness, girl, you must be ailing;
a Dear Lord have mercy. God, I plead!
a I'll sprinkle you with holy water,
a 'The Lord be with you now, my daughter!'
a 'Oh, I'm in love,' again she pleaded
a You're just not well, you're overheated.'
a Tatyana's charms and pallid air,
a Her long, unloosened braids of hair,
a And drops of tears . . . while on a hassock,
a A kerchief on her grizzled head,
a Sat nanny in her quilted cassock;
a And all the world in silence lay
a Beneath the moon's seductive ray.
a Far off Tatyana ranged in dreaming,
a And then a sudden thought came gleaming:
a But give me first a pen and paper;
a I won't be long . . . just leave the taper.
a For whom, Tatyana, is it meant?
a I've known great beauties proudly distant,
a Implacable, to all resistant,
a I've marvelled at their haughty manner,
a Their natural virtue's flaunted banner;
a As if in terror I had read
a Above their brows the sign of Hades:
a Their joy is striking men with fear,
a For love offends these charming ladies.
a Why I've seen ladies so complacent
a Before their loyal subjects' gaze,
a That they would even grow impatient
a With sighs of passion and with praise.
a With stern behaviour's grim attack,
a These creatures then would lure him back!
a By seeming in their words at least
a More tender to the wounded beast;
a Would chase sweet vanity again.
a So why is Tanya, then, more tainted?
a Is it because her simple heart
a Believes the chosen dream she's painted
a And in deceit will take no part?
a Because she heeds the call of passion
a In such an honest, artless fashion?
a But can't you, friends, forgive her, pray,
a The giddiness of passion's sway?
a She does not say: 'Let's wait till later
a To make love's value all the greater
a And then with doubt in fullest measure
a We'll whip his heart, and when it's tame . . .
a Revive it with a jealous flame;
a For otherwise, grown bored with pleasure,
a The cunning captive any day
a Might break his chains and slip away.'
a I face another complication:
a My country's honour will demand
a Without a doubt a full translation
a Of Tanya's letter from my hand.
a She knew the Russian language badly,
a Ignored our journals all too gladly,
a And in her native tongue, I fear,
a Could barely make her meaning clear;
a Has never been expressed in Russian;
a To read in Russian. Dread command!
a The Good Samaritan in hand!
a Have not those creatures you adore,
a Been weak at Russian conversation?
a Of usage and pronunciation;
a God spare me from the apparition,
a On leaving some delightful ball,
a Of bonneted Academician
a Or scholar in a yellow shawl!
a This generation's younger beauties,
a Responding to our journals' call,
a With grammar may delight us all,
a I lack the strength for true repentance,
a I know that gentle Parny's lays
a Are out of fashion nowadays.
a I'd have you with your art refashion
a A maiden's foreign words of passion
a And make them magic songs anew.
a And yield my rights to love's translation. . . .
a His heart grown deaf to commendation
a This touching whimsy free of art,
a This raving discourse of the heart
a Above the mist. And now the stream
a In silver curves begins to gleam.
a Her morning tea upon a tray.
a 'It's time, my sweet, to greet the day;
a Why, pretty one, you're up already!
a But thank the Lord, you seem more steady;
a 'Then send your grandson, little Thomas,
a I'm trying hard to pay attention;
a But we have lots of neighbours call,
a I couldn't even count them all.'
a 'But, sweetheart, I've grown old ... I mean . . .
a You know these days I'm not so clear,
a I'll take the letter, never fear.
a 'It's nothing, nanny, be at ease,
a Just send your grandson, will you please.'
a 'He's quite forgotten us, I fear.'
a 'He promised he would come today,'
a Said Lensky in his friendly way,
a Tatyana bowed her head in shame,
a As if they all thought her to blame.
a 'Twas dusk; and on the table, gleaming,
a It hissed and sent its vapour steaming
a A serving boy took cream around.
a And breathes upon the chilly glass;
a All lost in thought, the gentle lass
a And all the while her soul was aching,
a Then sudden hoofbeats! . . . Now she's quaking. . . .
a Onegin! 'Oh! 'And light as air,
a She's out the backway, down the stair
a From porch to yard, to garden straight;
a She runs, she flies; she dare not wait
a Past garden plots, small bridges, lawn,
a Past seedbeds to the brook so fast
a That, panting, on a bench at last
a She falls .... 'He's here! But all those faces!
a ' But still her anguished heart embraces
a While picking berries, filled the air
a By filling them with song instead
a For rural cunning isn't dead!)
a Tatyana listens, scarcely hearing
a The vibrant voices, sits apart,
a And waits impatient in her clearing
a To calm the tremor in her heart
a But finally she rose, forsaken,
a But hardly had she turned and taken
a The garden lane, when straight ahead,
a His eyes ablaze, Eugene stood waiting
a Like some grim shade of night's creating;
a And she, as if by fire seared,
a Drew back and stopped when he appeared. . . .
a A little walk, some rest and play;
a I'll finish up another day.
a I'm writing you this declaration
a What more can I in candour say?
a It may be now your inclination
a To scorn me and to turn away;
a But if my hapless situation
a I first tried silence and evasion;
a Believe me, you 'd have never learned
a The slightest hope that on occasion
a But once a week I'd see your face,
a Behold you at our country place,
a Could dream both day and night again
a They say you like to be alone
a And find the country unappealing;
a Why did you ever come to call?
a I'd not have known you then at all,
a I might have found (who knows?) another
a Another! No! In all creation
a There's no one else whom I'd adore;
a The heavens chose my destination
a You filled my dreams and sweetest trances;
a As yet unseen, and yet so dear,
a You stirred me with your wondrous glances,
a Your voice within my soul rang clear. . . .
a When you came in, I seemed to waken,
a I turned to flame, I felt all shaken,
a Did I not see your apparition
a Are you my angel of salvation
a Or hell's own demon of temptation?
a Be kind and send my doubts away;
a The things a simple girl would say,
a So be it then! Henceforth I place
a My faith in you and your affection;
a I plead with tears upon my face
a You cannot know: I'm so alone,
a And I must die without a moan.
a I close. I dare not now reread. . . .
a Lure some likely lusty lad
a To the circle of our dance.
a When we see him from afar,
a Cherries, yes, and raspberries,
a When we play our maiden games!'
a Time was, when cold debauch was lauded
a As love's high art. . . and was applauded
a But that pretentious game is dated,
a But fit for apes, who once held sway
a Amid our forbears' vaunted day;
a The fame of Lovelaces has faded
a Along with fashions long since dead:
a Who doesn't find dissembling dreary;
a (Recasting platitudes till weary)
a Who wouldn't grow fatigued with rages,
a Entreaties, vows, pretended fears,
a Betrayals, gossip, rings, and tears,
a With notes that run to seven pages,
a With watchful mothers, aunts who stare,
a And friendly husbands hard to bear!
a In early youth he'd been the prey
a And uncurbed passions ruled the day.
a Enchanted with each passing pleasure,
a And irked by fleet success soon after,
a He'd hear mid hum and hush alike
a And smothered yawns with brittle laughter:
a He ceased to know infatuation,
a Refused, he found quick consolation;
a He sought them out with no elation
a And left them too without vexation,
a And then upon the end of play,
a Just takes his leave and drives away
a And he recalled Tatyana's pallor,
a Her mournful air, her touching valour
a And then he soared, his soul alight
a Perhaps an ancient glow of passion
a Possessed him for a moment's sway . . .
a But never would he lead astray
a A trusting soul in callous fashion.
a And so let's hasten to the walk
a Where he and Tanya had their talk.
a Your candour has a great appeal
a And stirs in me, I won't conceal,
a Hear my confession too, I plead,
a Had pictures of domestication
a For but one moment held temptation
a Then, surely, none but you alone
a 'But I'm not made for exaltation:
a My soul's a stranger to its call;
a Your virtues are a vain temptation,
a For I'm not worthy of them all.
a However much I loved you, dear,
a Once used to you ... I'd cease, I fear;
a Would fail to touch my heart at all,
a Your tears in fact would only gall.
a Unsealed your heart to me so clearly?
a Is this the lot you've been assigned?
a I love you with a tender yearning,
a So hear me through without vexation:
a Young maidens find quick consolation
a Just so a sapling sheds its leaf
a To bud anew each vernal season.
a You'll fall in love again; but learn . . .
a To exercise restraint and reason,
a Thus spake Eugene his admonition.
a Tatyana listened to him preach.
a He offered her his arm. Despairing,
a She took it and with languid bearing
a ('Mechanically', as people say),
a She bowed her head and moved away. . . .
a I know that you'll agree, my reader,
a But spiteful people saw no beauty
a Ah, friends, those friends! I greatly fear,
a I find their friendship much too dear.
a What's that? Just that. Mere conversation
a To lull black empty thoughts awhile;
a In passing, though, one observation:
a That any garret babbler hatches,
a And all the social rabble snatches;
a Repeating it a hundred ways
a To decent folk for days and days,
a And are your kinfolk well today?
a To hear what I'm prepared to say
a On 'kinfolk' and their implications?
a Well, here's my view of close relations:
a And, following the old tradition,
a To visit come the Christmas feast,
a Or send a wish by mail at least;
a To quite forget us, if they please
a So grant them, God, long life and ease!
a Of course the love of tender beauties
a Of course it's so. And yet be wary,
a For fashions change, and views will vary,
a May in a trice be swept away:
a For Satan treats all love as play.
a But whom to love? To trust and treasure?
a And who'll be kind enough to measure
a Why spend your efforts all in vain;
a Just love yourself and ease the pain,
a My most esteemed and honoured reader!
a Within her heart the frenzied beating
a Her gentle soul, athirst with aching;
a Nay, ever more intensely quaking,
a The glow of life has vanished starkly;
a And Tanya's youth now glimmers darkly:
a Thus stormy shadows cloak with grey
a The scarcely risen, newborn day.
a She's pale and wasted, doesn't speak!
a She finds all former pleasures bleak.
a 'It's time she married . . . awful waste. . . .'
a But that's enough. I must make haste
a To cheer the dark imagination
a With pictures of a happy pair;
a I can't, though, readers, help but care
a And feel a deep commiseration;
a Each passing hour more captivated
a By Olga's winning, youthful charms,
a Vladimir gave his heart and waited
a To serve sweet bondage with his arms.
a He's ever near. In gloomy weather
a One loosened curl with soft caress
a Some moralistic novel, say,
a Make Chateaubriand's works seem grey;
a But sometimes there are certain pages
a (Outlandish things, mere foolish rages,
a Unfit for maiden's heart or head),
a Which Lensky, blushing, leaves unread. . . .
a They steal away whenever able
a And sit for hours seeing naught,
a Their elbows propped upon the table;
a When he drives home, she still engages
a He fills her album's fleeting pages
a Beneath the lines from other hands,
a He plants a tender verse that stands
a A moment's thought whose trace shall last
a Unchanged when even years have passed.
a With spellings awesome in abusage,
a Unmetred lines of hallowed usage
a Qu 'crirez-vous sur ces tablettes?
a And 'neath it: toute vous Annette;
a You're sure to find there decorations:
a Rosettes, a torch, a pair of hearts;
a You'll read, no doubt, fond protestations:
a With all my love, till death us parts;
a For there, at heart, I feel persuaded
a That any zealous vulgar phrase
a Will earn me an indulgent gaze,
a And won't then be evaluated
a But you, odd tomes of haughty ladies,
a You libraries of darkest Hades
a You volumes nimbly ornamented
a Whatever comes to his attention
a With all the surgings of your heart,
a Sing God knows whom in splendid art
a Will on some future day relate
a The uncut story of your fate.
a 'Have done with all your lamentations,
a Your endless croakings and gyrations
a You're right. And will you point with praises
a Our stock of dead ideas and phrases?
a Is that it, friend? 'Far from it. Nay!
a Write odes, good sirs, write odes, I say . . .
a 'The way they did in former ages,
a Those mighty years still rich in fame. . . .'
a Just solemn odes? . . . On all our pages?!
a Oh come now, friend, it's all the same.
a Do you find him more pleasing, pray,
a Than our glum rhymesters of today? . . . .
a How oft have tearful poets chances
a To read their works before the glances
a Of those they love? Good sense declares
a That no reward on earth compares.
a How blest, shy lover, to be granted
a A beauty languid and enchanted!
a Or sometimes after dinners dreary,
a When some good neighbour drops in weary
a I'll corner him and catch his coat
a And hearing my sweet stanzas soar,
a And as I watch them disappearing,
a Each has his own preoccupation,
a His favourite sport or avocation:
a One likes to bask in melancholy;
a Have patience, friends, I beg you, pray;
a And show you how he spent each day.
a Onegin lived in his own heaven:
a Gulnare's proud singer his example,
a He'd drink his coffee, sometimes sample
a The burbling brook, the wooded shade,
a Of white-skinned, dark-eyed country maid;
a Were my Onegin's saintly pleasures,
a Fair summer's days and careless treasures,
a Of southern winters, this is clear;
a And though we're loath to cast aspersions,
a The sky breathed autumn, turned and darkled;
a The friendly sun less often sparkled;
a The fields all lay in misty peace;
a The sombre season near at hand;
a November marched across the land.
a The empty fields in silence wait;
a And on the road . . . grown lean and fearless,
a The wolf appears with hungry mate;
a The joyous tribe of boys berates
a And cuts the ice with ringing skates;
a To swim upon the water's breast;
a But how is one, in this dull season,
a Take walks? The views give little reason,
a Go ride the steppe's harsh open spaces?
a Your mount, if put to try his paces
a So stay beneath your roof... try reading:
a Adrift in idle, slothful ways;
a From bed to icy bath he wanders,
a And then at home all day he stays,
a Alone, and sunk in calculation,
a His only form of recreation
a But as the rural dusk encroaches,
a The cue's forgot, the billiards fade;
a Before the hearth the table's laid.
a He waits.... At last his guest approaches:
a It's Lensky's troika, three fine roans;
a 'Come on, let's dine, my stomach groans!'
a Mot, that wine most blest and heady,
a Or Veuve Cliquot, the finest class,
a Is brought in bottle chilled and ready
a And set beside the poet's glass.
a (A simile in many ways);
a It charmed me too, in other days:
a For its sake once, I squandered gladly
a Of acting foolish, raving madly,
a Just plays my stomach false, I fear;
a And nowadays I find more pleasing
a You're like a comrade, ever steady,
a And when we wish it, always ready
a The fire goes out; the coal, still gleaming,
a Takes on a film of ash and pales;
a The rising vapours, faintly streaming,
a Curl out of sight; the hearth exhales
a A breath of warmth. The pipe smoke passes
a Up chimney flue. The sparkling glasses
a (I'm fond of friendly conversation
a As people say without translation,
a 'And how are our dear neighbours faring?
a Tatyana and your Olga, pray?
a ' 'Just half a glass, old boy, be sparing. . .
a The family's well, I think I'd say;
a They send you greetings and affection. . . .
a You ought to, really . . . they'll be flattered;
a Since then, it seems, they've hardly mattered.
a In fact. . . Good Lord, my wits are bleak!
a 'Tatyana's name-day celebration
a (And Olga too!) an invitation;
a 'There'll be a crush and lots of babble
a And all that crowd of local rabble.'
a Come on, let's go, do me the favour!'
a 'Alright, I'll go.' 'Well done, first class!'
a And with these words he drained his glass
a So Lensky soared as he awaited
a His wedding day two weeks ahead;
a With joy his heart anticipated
a And love's sweet crown of jubilations.
a But Hymen's cares and tribulations,
a While we, the foes of Hymen's banner,
a Perceive full well that home life means
a In Lafontaine's insipid manner.
a But my poor Lensky, deep at heart,
a Was born to play this very part.
a Who takes cold intellect for naught,
a Who rests within the heart's sweet places
a As does a drunk in sleep's embraces,
a Or as, more tenderly I'd say,
a A butterfly in blooms of May;
a And nature seemed to wait and wait
a For winter. Then, in January,
a The second night, the snow fell late.
a Next day as dawn was just advancing,
a Tatyana woke and, idly glancing,
a Creates a passage with his sleigh;
a Aware of snow, his nag is fearful,
a But shambles somehow down the way.
a The driver sits behind the dash
a In sheepskin coat and scarlet sash.
a While he plays horse and runs ahead;
a The rascal froze his fingers, playing,
a But you, perhaps, are not attracted
a Where lowly nature is enacted
a Warmed by the god of inspiration,
a Another bard in exaltation
a Has painted us the snow new-laid
a And winter's joys in every shade.
a I'm sure you'll find him most engaging
a When he, in flaming verse, portrays
a But I have no intent of waging
a Profoundly loved, in its cold beauty,
a Those twelfth tide eves, by old tradition,
a Were marked at home on their estate:
a The servant maids would guess the fate
a Two soldier husbands and a war.
a With secret meanings they'd impart;
a Forebodings filled and pressed her heart.
a Her face would pale, her teeth would chatter.
a To light the sombre sky and shatter
a She'd hurry and, in agitation,
a Before the star's disintegration,
a Would whisper it her secret prayer.
a Or if she happened anywhere
a Or if amid the fields one day
a A fleeing hare would cross her way,
a Yet even in these same afflictions
a She found a secret charm in part:
a For nature fond of contradictions
a Has so designed the human heart.
a The holy days are here. What gladness! . . .
a Bright youth divines, not knowing sadness,
a And sees the grave before it yawn,
a No matter: childish hope appears
a To murmur lies in aged ears.
a Tatyana watches, fascinated,
a To wondrous shapes which designated
a Some wondrous thing that she would learn.
a Then from a basin filled with water
a When Tanya's ring turned up at last,
a The song they sang was from the past:
a ''The peasants there have hoards of treasure,
a And famous!' But the plaintive measure
a And glides so peaceful and transcendent. . . .
a Upon the moon to bring it nearer;
a But all that shows in her dark glass
a Is just the trembling moon, alas. . . .
a Looks back and answers: 'Agafon.'
a But then sheer terror seized Tatyana ...
a And I, recalling poor Svetlana,
a Sweet Lei now floats above her head,
a And what an awesome dream she's dreaming:
a She walks upon a snowy dale,
a And all around her, dully gleaming,
a Sad mist and murky gloom prevail;
a Amid the drifting, snowbound spaces
a A dark and seething torrent races,
a A hoary frothing wave that strains
a And tears asunder winter's chains;
a Tatyana stopped in sudden dread
a Before the raging gulf ahead.
a As at a vexing separation,
a She saw no friendly soul on station
a A huge and matted bear appeared!
a Tatyana screamed! He growled and reared,
a Then stretched a paw . . . sharp claws abhorrent,
a To Tanya, who could barely stand;
a She took it with a trembling hand
a Of naked linden, birch, and ash
a The beams from heaven's lanterns flash;
a The shrubs, the land ... all lie asleep,
a She's reached the wood, the bear still tracking;
a Soft snow, knee-deep, lies all about;
a A jutting branch looms up, attacking,
a Behind her back she hears the bear,
a But shy and frightened, does not dare
a She sinks in snow; the bear alertly
a Dense brush abounds; on every hand
a Forlorn and drifting snowbanks stand;
a She's in a hall; no bear at least;
a As if it were some funeral feast;
a She can't make sense of what she's hearing,
a Beside a short-tailed dwarf. . . and that
a Is half a crane and half a cat.
a More wondrous still and still more fearful:
a A crab upon a spider sat;
a While spinning round in bright red hat;
a A windmill there was squat-jig dancing
a And cracked and waved its sails while prancing;
a Guffawing, barking, whistles, claps,
a And human speech and hoofbeat taps!
a But what was Tanya's stunned reaction
a The hero of our novel's action!
a Onegin sits amid the roar
a He's master here, there's no mistaking;
a And Tanya, now no longer quaking,
a The night-time lanterns all about;
a And fear assails her; in a panic
a She tries to flee . . . but feels too weak;
a In anguished writhing, almost manic,
a She wants to scream . . . but cannot speak;
a Eugene throws wide the door, revealing
a To monstrous looks and hellish squealing
a And whiskers, tusks, and tufted tails,
a Red bloody tongues and snouts and nails,
a 'She's mine!' announced Eugene, commanding;
a The maid alone was left there standing
a And on her shoulder rests his head. . . .
a He rants at them, his eyes turn dread;
a Tatyana lies there nearly dead.
a And wakes to find her room alight,
a Where dawn's vermilion rays are playing;
a And lighter than a swallow, saying:
a But she ignores her sister's pleading,
a Keeps leafing through some book she's reading,
a So wrapt in thought she hasn't heard.
a Nor Seneca's, nor Byron's pages,
a Nor even Fashion Plates Displayed
a Had ever so engrossed a maid:
a She read, my friends, that king of sages
a And analyst of dreams unclear.
a This noble and profound creation
a To show them in their isolation,
a Just what the dreadful vision meant.
a But lo! . . . with crimson hand Aurora
a Since dawn Dame Larin's near relations
a Have filled the house; whole congregations
a Of neighbour clans have come in drays,
a Wet nurses shout and babies bleat.
a Fat Pustyakv, the local charmer,
a Gvozdin as well, that model farmer,
a The two Skotinins, grey as sages,
a With children of all shapes and ages
a Lint-covered, in his visored cap
a (As you, of course, well know the chap);
a True Gaul, Triquet in pocket carried
a A verse to warn that Tanya tarried,
a In some old tattered almanac
a Until Triquet, who had a knack
a And boldly put for 'belle Nina'
a The charming line: 'belle Tatyan.'
a The regimental band's appearing!
a But dinner's served. And so by pairs,
a And arm in arm, they seek their chairs:
a Then for a moment chatter ceases
a All around The clink of plates and forks increases,
a But soon the guests are somewhat sated;
a The hubbub grows more animated . . .
a It's Lensky . . . with Eugene! 'Oh dear!'
a Each moves his setting, shifts his chair,
a And in a trice they seat the pair.
a And paler than the moon at dawn,
a And trembles like a hunted fawn.
a The wretched girl is scarcely breathing;
a The two friends' greetings pass unheard;
a And almost fall; the poor thing's ready
a And they prevailed. Her lips more steady,
a She murmured something through her pain
a And managed somehow to remain.
a All tragico-hysteric moaning,
a All girlish fainting-fits and tears,
a Had long since set Eugene to groaning:
a He'd borne enough in former years.
a Already cross and irritated
a By being at this feast he hated,
a And fumed in sullen indignation;
a He swore that he'd make Lensky pay
a And be avenged that very day.
a Exulting in anticipation,
a He inwardly began to draw
a Caricatures of those he saw.
a Between the meat and blancmanger,
a Tsimlynsky wine ... a whole array
a The fizzing wine comes gushing fast;
a To have his couplet heard at last,
a Triquet stands up; the congregation
a Falls silent in anticipation.
a With verse in hand, looks Tanya's way
a The bard, whose modesty's endearing,
a Is first to toast her where he stands,
a Then puts his couplet in her hands.
a Now greetings come, congratulations;
a Tatyana thanks them for the day;
a But when Eugene's felicitations
a Came due in turn, the girl's dismay,
a Her weariness and helpless languor,
a Evoked his pity more than anger:
a He bowed to her in silence, grave . . .
a But somehow just the look he gave
a Was wondrous tender. If asserting
a His look was still a tender dart:
a It reawakened Tanya's heart.
a The chairs, pushed back, give out a clatter;
a Thus bees from luscious hive will scatter,
a Their festive dinner all too pleasing,
a The ladies to the hearth repair;
a The maidens whisper by the stair;
a As Boston, ombre (old men's play),
a And whist, which reigns supreme today,
a They've shifted round and been reseated;
a Have scarcely taken cups in hand,
a When suddenly from ballroom doorway
a Bassoon and flute announce the band.
a To Tanya, Lensky; Harlikva,
a Buynov whirls off Pustyakva;
a (In Chapter One, if you recall),
a To paint a Petersburg grand ball;
a O charming feet and mad affliction!
a And cleanse this Chapter Five at last
a Of all digressions from the past.
a He stays beside her when she's seated,
a Proceeds to talk of this and that;
a Two minutes barely has she sat. . .
a And then their waltzing is repeated!
a Its thunder once could even rack
a And under heels parquet would crack;
a The very windows shook like Hades.
a But now it's changed: we're all like ladies;
a The old mazurka hasn't faltered;
a Remain the same; they've not been altered
a The modern Russian's new disease.
a And Olga too; Eugene alertly
a He steers her, gliding nonchalantly,
a And bending, whispers her gallantly
a Some common madrigal to please,
a She blushes in appreciation,
a Her prim conceited face alight,
a Consumed with jealous indignation,
a But no, she can't. What explanation? . . .
a The next dance too. In God's creation!
a Can this be real? Scarce more than swaddler
a The blow has left poor Lensky shattered;
a And gallops off. Now nothing mattered
a Though pleased with the revenge he'd taken,
a Felt all his old ennui awaken,
a She too now yawns and, as she dances,
a Seeks Lensky out with furtive glances;
a To Olga like some dreadful dream.
a Then beds are made; the guests are all
a Assigned their rooms from entrance hall
a All's quiet now. Inside the parlour,
a The portly Mr. Pustyakov
a Lies snoring with his portly partner.
a And Flynov, who'd been reeling badly-
a On dining chairs have bedded gladly;
a The rooms of Olga and Tatyana
a Are filled with girls in sleep's embrace.
a Alone, beside the window case,
a Illumined sadly by Diana,
a Poor Tanya, sleepless and in pain,
a Sits gazing at the darkened plain.
a His unexpected reappearance,
a And jealous anguish pierced her breast
a Her heart; as if in awful fashion
a A rumbling, black abyss did yawn. ...
a 'I'll die,' she whispers to the dawn,
a 'But death from him is sweet compassion.
a A new persona has arrived:
a Five versts or so from Krasnogory,
a The tavern tribune and a liar
a Time was, when flunkies in high places
a He could, it's true, from twenty paces,
a And once, when riding battle station,
a He'd earned a certain reputation
a Drunk as a pig, and suffered capture
a Accepting hostage bonds with rapture
a He used to banter rather neatly,
a And ended up the dunce instead.
a He loved good merry disputations,
a Or cunningly start altercations;
a Goes out of us when youth is dead
a And my Zaretsky, as I've said,
a Neath flow'ring cherries and acacias,
a Secure at last from tempest's rage,
a Lives out his life a proper sage,
a Plants cabbages like old Horatius,
a His children at their ABCs.
a (Although he thought him lacking heart),
a And liked his common sense in part.
a He'd spent some time with him with pleasure,
a And so was not in any measure
a A proper challenge or cartel:
a Onegin, with his first reaction,
a Quite curtly offered satisfaction
a And bade the envoy, if he cared,
a To say that he was quite prepared.
a Avoiding further explanation,
a Eugene, once left to contemplation
a To mock in such a casual fashion
a At tender love's still timid passion;
a And why not let the poet rage!
a A fool, at eighteen years of age,
a Eugene, who loved the youth at heart,
a Might well have played a better part
a Instead of bristling like a beast;
a He should have spoken words of healing,
a Disarmed youth's heart... or tried at least.
a 'Too late,' he thought, 'the moment's wasted. . . .
a What's more, that duelling fox has tasted
a His chance to mix in this affair
a That wicked gossip with his flair
a At home the poet, seething, paces
a And waits impatiently to hear.
a Then in his babbling neighbour races,
a Next day, for sure, they'd drive at dawn
a He thought she'd blush with self-reproach,
a Grow flustered when she saw his coach;
a She bounded from the porch above
a 'Why did you leave last night so early?'
a Was all that Olga, smiling, said.
a And silently he hung his head.
a All jealousy and rage departed
a Before that gaze so openhearted,
a He trembles, hunts for words in vain:
a He's happy now, he's almost sane. . . .
a Once more in solemn, rapt attention
a Before his darling Olga's face,
a The night before and what took place;
a I'll never let that foul depraver
a My lovely lily, stalk and blade;
a Nor watch this two-day blossom fade
a That seared my Tanya's wounded heart!
a Of how these two had grown apart,
a Or that by morn they'd be debating,
a For which of them the grave lay waiting!
a But no one knew her inclination
a Or chanced upon the sad affair.
a Eugene had kept his silent air;
a Tatyana pined in isolation;
a All evening Lensky was abstracted,
a But those on whom the Muse has acted
a But now it's late and time for leaving.
a His pistols; then he put them back.
a A book of Schiller's from the rack;
a He sees before him, wondrous fair,
a By chance those verses haven't vanished;
a 'Ah, whither, whither are ye banished,
a My springtime's golden days so dear?
a And whether, pierced, I fall anointed,
a Come each in turn as they're appointed;
a And blest with all its cares the day,
a And blest the dark that comes to stay!
a To shed a tear in desolation
a And think at my untimely grave:
a He loved me and for me he gave
a His mournful life in consecration! . . .
a Beloved friend, sweet friend, I wait,
a Oh, come, Oh, come, I am thy mate!'
a (We say 'romantically' although,
a But then at last, as it was dawning,
a With drooping head and frequent yawning,
a Upon the modish word 'ideal'
a Vladimir gently dozed for real;
a When in that silent room appeared
a I'll bet Onegin woke at dawn.'
a The cock hails Vesper once again;
a Above his bed and holds him fast.
a But now he slowly wakes at last,
a Looks outand sees with some dismay,
a He'd better leave without delay.
a He rings in haste and, with a racket,
a With slippers and a dressing jacket,
a They're leaving for the duelling place,
a Guillot's to fetch the pistol case.
a The sleigh's prepared; his pacing ceases;
a Then has the horses, on command,
a Removed to where two oaklings stand.
a Impatient, but in no great panic,
a Vladimir waited near the dam;
a Meanwhile Zaretsky, born mechanic,
a Was carping at the millstone's cam.
a Onegin, late, made explanation.
a Zaretsky frowned in consternation:
a In duels a purist doctrinaire,
a Zaretsky favoured stout reliance
a On proper form; he'd not allow
a Dispatching chaps just anyhow,
a But called for strict and full compliance
a With rules, traditions, ancient ways
a (Which we, of course, in him should praise).
a With our Zaretsky at a distance
a And sealed the solemn compact fast,
a The foes stood by with eyes downcast.
a The foes! How long has bloodlust parted
a How long ago did they, warmhearted,
a As in a dreadful senseless dream,
a But enmity among their class
a Holds shame in savage dread, alas.
a Inside the pans. Screwed fast to metal,
a The duellists shed their cloaks and wait.
a Zaretsky paces off their fate
a Then leads each man to where he'll stand,
a And each takes pistol into hand.
a With quiet, firm, and measured tread,
a The first four steps that lay ahead
a Four fateful steps. The space decreasing,
a Onegin then, while still not ceasing
a His slow advance, was first to raise
a His pistol with a level gaze.
a Five paces more, while Lensky waited
a Onegin fired! The hour fated
a Eugene, in sudden chill, despairs,
a Runs to the stricken youth . . . and stares!
a Cut down by fate at break of dawn!
a The steaming blood poured forth, revealing
a The gaping wound beneath his breast.
a One moment back a breath's duration
a This heart still throbbed with inspiration;
a Its hatreds, hopes, and loves still beat,
a Its blood ran hot with life's own heat.
a Inside it all is hushed and stark,
a Gone silent and forever dark.
a But where, God knows. All trace is dead.
a With epigrams of spite and daring
a It's pleasant when you see him staring
a Ashamed to see himself the clearer;
a On granting him his resting place
a By shooting at his pallid face
a From some quite gentlemanly distance.
a And what would be your own reaction
a A youthful friend for some infraction:
a His blood by slow degrees congealing,
a In anguish, with his heart forsaken,
a The pistol in his hand like lead,
a Eugene stared down at Lensky, shaken.
a His neighbour spoke: 'Well then, he's dead.'
a Then called his men and walked away.
a Zaretsky, carefully, then lay
a The frozen corpse on sleigh, preparing
a The horses neighed, their nostrils flaring,
a And wet the metal bit with foam,
a Where now the ardent agitation,
a The fine and noble aspiration
a The thirst for knowledge, work, and fame,
a The dread of vice, the fear of shame?
a And pledge of life beyond this earth!
a The world with good, or earn at least
a Might well have raised, before it ceased,
a A call to ring throughout the ages.
a Perhaps, upon the world's great stages,
a Now doomed by death to pass unheard;
a Receive our race's hymns of praise,
a Nor hear the ages bless his days.
a Or maybe he was merely fated
a And as his years of youth abated,
a His dreams and songs all rent asunder;
a Meand'ring from the nearby valley.
a Their pitchers in the stream and dally;
a Sometimes a shepherd sits there waiting
a (Till on the fields, spring rains have passed)
a And sings of Volga fishers, plaiting
a His simple, coloured shoes of bast;
a And lifting up her veil, she'll read
a Into the open field to gaze,
a By Lensky's brief, ill-fated days.
a She'll wonder too: 'Did Olga languish?
a Her heart consumed with lasting anguish?
a Or did the time of tears soon pass?
a And where's her sister now, poor lass?
a And where that gloomy, strange betrayer,
a The youthful poet's friend and slayer?'
a In time, I promise, I'll not fail
a To tell you all in full detail.
a And sterner cares now seek admission;
a O dreams! Where has your sweetness vanished?
a And where has youth (glib rhyme) been banished?
a Can it be true, its bloom has passed,
a Has withered, withered now at last?
a All elegiac play aside
a And so, life's afternoon has started,
a But let us then as friends be parted,
a I thank you for your host of treasures,
a For pain and grief as well as pleasures,
a My thanks to you. With you I've tasted,
a Enough! Clear-souled and far from wasted,
a I start upon an untrod way
a To take my rest from yesterday.
a And you, my youthful inspiration,
a Come stir the bleak imagination,
a Enrich the slumbering heart's dull load,
a More often visit my abode;
a Or harden and congeal alone,
a How sad I find your apparition,
a What sombre echoes of ambition
a Then stir my blood and fill my breast!
a What tender and oppressive yearning
a When in some quiet rural place
a I  feel her breath upon my face!
a Or am I now inured to gladness;
a Casts only spleen and languid sadness
a On one whose heart has long been dead,
a For whom but darkness lies ahead?
a Of leaves that perished in the fall,
a As bitter losses we recall;
a Or do we mark with lamentation
a How nature's lively renovation
a Perhaps in thought we reassemble,
a That sets the aching heart atremble
a With visions of some distant place,
a A magic night, the moon's embrace. . . .
a Now is the time, you hibernators,
a You fortunate procrastinators,
a Spring calls you to your country seat;
a It's time for flowers, labours, heat,
a In your imported coach, I pray,
a Where you spent wintertime in play;
a But recently this winter stayed,
a Not far from our unhappy maid,
a Young Tanya, my enchanted dreamer;
a Where only his sad trace remains.
a Where hills half circle round a valley,
a Through greening fields, and watch it dally
a Beneath two pine trees, old for ages.
a He died too soon ... his death courageous,
a At such an age, in such a year.
a There was a time when breezes playing
a A secret wreath that hung there swaying
a But now the monument stands dreary
a Alone the shepherd, grey and weary,
a Beneath it sings as in the past
a and plaits his simple shoes of bast.
a Another captured her affection,
a A lancer whom she loves with passion;
a Her head bent down in modest fashion,
a In deaf eternity's grim shade,
a The fateful news, he'd been betrayed?
a Of angry heirs in hot debate
a Contests obscenely our estate.
a Soon Olga's happy voice and beauty
a Dame Larin's eyes began to water
a As she embraced her younger daughter
a Onto the porch and fussed about
a And long she watched the road they'd taken,
a As through a mist of stifled tears. . . .
a Now Tanya is alone, forsaken!
a Companion of so many years,
a She roams in aimless desolation,
a Now gazes at the vacant park....
a But all seems joyless, bleak and dark;
a There's nothing offers consolation
a And in the solitude her passion
a Her heart speaks out in urgent fashion
a She'll never see him . . . and be grateful,
a She finds a brother's slayer hateful
a Has flown to someone else instead;
a Like smoke across an azure ocean.
a 'Twas evening and the heavens darkled.
a Were bound for home. Still waters sparkled.
a Of fishermen were dimly gleaming.
a Tatyana walked, alone and dreaming,
a And as she gazed upon that place
a Her pounding heart began to race.
a 'Should I go on, turn back, or what?
a And so, scarce breathing, down she hastened
a And looked about, perplexed and chastened
a To find herself at his estate. . . .
a She entered the deserted gate.
a They made the barking hounds obey,
a Then led the lady, safe, away.
a Asked Tanya . . . and the children leapt
a She found a cue left unattended
a Upon the table after play,
a And on a rumpled sofa lay
a 'Where master used to sit alone.
a And here's the master's study, dear;
a He slept, took coffee in these quarters,
a On Sundays at his window station,
a His glasses on, he'd deign to play
a Some cards with me to pass the day.
a God grant his mortal soul salvation,
a Tatyana looks in melting pleasure
a She finds it all a priceless treasure,
a The heap of books, the carpet spread
a The view outdoors the lunar pall,
a Lord Byron's portrait on the wall,
a with clouded brow beneath a hat,
a The arms compressed and folded flat.
a And now it's time, indeed long past,
a That our young pilgrim leave at last.
a To see the vacant house alone
a Outside the gate Tatyana parted
a She rose at dawn and off she started
a To see the empty house again;
a Then turned to see the books he'd favoured.
a At first she didn't wish to read,
a But soon her thirsting spirit savoured
a Although Onegin's inclination
a He did exempt from condemnation
a The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
a In which our age is well displayed
a And modern man himself portrayed
a Some pages still preserved the traces
a The girl's attentive eye embraces
a And Tanya sees with trepidation
a The kind of thought or observation
a Or where he'd tacitly agreed.
a His pencil marks with special care;
a And so, in slow but growing fashion
a My Tanya starts to understand
a More clearly now - thank God - her passion
a And him for whom, by fate's command,
a That dangerous and sad pariah,
a What was he then? An imitation?
a A Muscovite in Harold's cloak,
a Compendium of affectation,
a Where two old friends in conversation
a Speak out on Tanya's situation:
a Dame Larin muttered with a moan.
a 'Her younger sister married neatly;
a Just says: "I can't", then broods away,
a And wanders through those woods all day.'
a To stay with us and seemed transported;
a But no! the deal fell through again.'
a To Moscow and the marriage mart!
a They've vacancies galore . . . take heart!'
a 'But I've so little income, father.'
a 'Sufficient for one winter's stay;
a Or borrow then from me, let's say.'
a To hear such sensible advice;
a And judge her harshly from the start:
a Her simple, open country heart
a And antiquated turns of phrase
a Were sure to bring a mocking gaze
a O  horrors! No, she'd better stay
a Safe in her woods and never stray.
a With dawn's first rays Tatyana races
a And gazing softly, she embraces
a 'Farewell, my peaceful vales and fountains!
a Farewell, you too, familiar mountains
a And woods where once I used to roam!
a And all that final summer season
a Would stop her now for no good reason
a To all her groves and meadows, yearning
a The golden autumn now arriving.
a Now nature, tremulous, turns pale
a The clouds before them far and near:
a She's spread herself through field and fountain,
a She lies atop the farthest mountain
a She's levelled with a fluffy blanket
a The frost has gleamed, and we give thanks
a For Mother Winter's happy pranks.
a But Tanya's heart is far from captured:
a From bathhouse roof to wash, enraptured,
a Her shoulders, face, and breast. With dread
a She views the winter path ahead.
a The final hours come at last.
a Is checked, relined, and soon made fast.
a The usual three-cart train will carry
a What household goods are necessary:
a The mattresses, the trunks and chairs,
a Some jars of jam and kitchen wares,
a They're harnessed to the coach and steadied;
a The cooks make lunch for one and all;
a The heaped-up wagons now are readied;
a The wenches and the drivers brawl.
a To bid their mistresses farewell.
a The ancient coach creeps out the gate.
a 'Farewell, my peaceful home and fate!
a When we have broadened education,
a (By scientific computation,
a Within five hundred years about),
a But roads are bad now in our nation;
a Neglected bridges rot and fall;
a Bedbugs and fleas at every station
a Won't let the traveller sleep at all.
a No inns exist. At posting stages
a They hang pretentious menu pages,
a The traveller's futile appetite;
a Treats Europe's dainty artefacts
a With mighty Russian hammer whacks,
a And all the ditches that abound
a And yet a trip in winter season
a Like modish verse devoid of reason,
a Our Russian troikas never weary;
a Unluckily, Dame Larin wasted
a And so our maiden fully tasted
a But now they're near. Before them, gleaming,
a Its ancient domes and spires streaming
a How oft. . . forlorn and separated
a When wayward fate has made me stray
a I've dreamt of Moscow far away!
a With meaning for our Russian hearts!
a How many echoes it imparts!
a And here's Petrovsky Castle, hoary
a Nor bowed her head in subjugation;
a No welcome feast did she prepare
a But lit instead a conflagration.
a Farewell now, scene of fame unsteady,
a There gleam the city gates already!
a The sleigh glides over ruts and passes
a By sentry booths and peasant lasses;
a Bokhrins, sleighs, apothecaries,
a Muzhiks and merchants, Cossack guards;
a Past towers, hovels, boulevards,
a Great balconies and monasteries;
a Past gateway lions' lifted paws,
a And crosses dense with flocks of daws.
a For two full hours; then, quite late
a Before a mansion's double gate.
a For now they'll seek accommodation
a With Tanya's aunt, a kind relation
a In glasses and a torn old coat,
a With sock in hand he led the way
a To where the prostrate princess lay;
a 'Princesse, mon ange!' 'Pachette!' 'Oh, Laura!'
a 'I hope you'll stay?' 'Dear cousin Laura!'
a I'd swear it's from some novel's pages!'
a 'And here's my Tanya.' 'Lord, it's ages!
a I think I must be dreaming, dear. . . .
a On Christmas eve, he paid a call:
a He married off his son this fall.
a I drag about like some poor laggard.
a But here, your trip has left you haggard;
a I've got no strength . . . this weary breast
a Not only woe. . . . It's true, my dear,
a I'm good for nothing now, I fear;
a Left Tanya moved; but she felt sad
a And missed the room she'd always had.
a In bed, beneath her silken curtain,
a She lies there sleepless and uncertain;
a She sees an unknown yard instead:
a And now they trundle Tanya daily
a To family dinners just to share
a With grandams and granduncles gaily
a Her languid and abstracted air.
a Those kin who've come from distant places
a Are always met with warm embraces,
a 'How Tanya's grown! It seems, my dear,
a And since I dried your baby tears!'
a 'And since I pulled you by the ears!'
a In them, though, nothing ever alters;
a Old Aunt Elena never falters
a Still powdered is Lukorya Lvovna;
a A liar still, Lyubov Petrovna;
a Her husband, clubman come whatever,
a Their daughters, after brief embraces,
a In silence Moscow's youthful graces
a A bit provincial and affected,
a And somewhat pale, too thin and small,
a But on the whole, not bad at all;
a Then bowing to innate compassion,
a They fluff her curls in latest fashion,
a And in their singsong tones impart
a Their girlish secrets of the heart
a Their hopes, and pranks, and maiden dreams;
a Though now and then some gossip gleams.
a And then they ask, in compensation
a For their sweet flow of revelation,
a For her confessions of romance.
a But Tanya, in a kind of trance,
a Attends their giddy conversation
a Without response and takes no part;
a And all the while she guards her heart
a With silence and in meditation:
a Tatyana tries to pay attention
a They seem so pallid and so weary,
a And even in their slander dreary.
a Not even in some chance remark;
a The languid mind will find no spark,
a Then, leaning by the door, prepared
a An elegy, to show he cared.
a And managed to dispel her trance;
a Put straight his wig and asked around
a But where Melpomene still stages
a Her stormy scenes and wails aloud
a And in her gaudy mantle rages
a Where just Terpsichore enchants
a The youthful lover of the dance
a (As was the case for nothing passes
a No modish connoisseur his glasses,
a They take her to the Grand Assembly:
a And there the crush, the glare, the heat,
a And she, whose beauty I admire
a Mid wives and maidens shines alone.
a With what celestial pride she grazes
a What languor fills her lovely breast!
a How sensuous her wondrous gazes! . . .
a But there, enough; have done at last:
a You've paid your due to follies past.
a Observed by none, and near despair,
a Her flowers, novels, daily labours ...
a That dusky, linden-shaded walk
a Where he and she once had their talk.
a And so, far off in thought she wandered:
a Tatyana, whisp'ring in her ear:
a 'Look quickly to your left, my dear.'
a 'My left? But why? It seems like gawking.'
a That group in front; you see that pair . . .
a In uniform? The one not talking . . .
a But here let's honour with affection
a On which, herewith, these observations:
a I sing strange whims and aberrations,
a And armed with your good staff, I pray,
a May I not roam too far astray.
a Inside our Lyce garden wall
a But read no Cicero at all
a Those springtime days in secret valleys,
a Where swans call out and beauty dallies,
a My student cell turned incandescent;
a What wings our first successes gave!
a As he descended to the grave.
a To share with all the world her beauty,
a Would take my merry Muse along
a To rowdy feasts and altercations
a The bane of midnight sentry stations;
a She brought her gifts . . . and danced about,
a But from that band I soon departed
a How often, on the course I charted,
a How often on the shores of Tauris,
a For strange and simple tongues instead
a To sing the savage steppe, elated;
a And in my garden she appeared
a A country missinfatuated,
a With mournful air and brooding glance,
a And in her hands a French romance.
a And now I seize the first occasion
a I watch with jealous trepidation
a Her rustic charms on full display.
a And lo! my beauty calmly passes
a Through ranks of men from highborn classes,
a The gowns, the talk, the milling mass,
a The slow parade of guests who pass
a The sombre men who form a frame
a Around each painted belle and dame.
a Can that be he? It is, I say.
a 'But when did fate cast him our way?
a 'Is he the same, or is he learning?
a Cosmopolite? A Slavophile?
a A Quaker? Bigot? might one ask?
a Or will he sport some other mask?
a Or maybe he's just dedicated,
a In any case, here's my advice:
a Give up a role when it's outdated.
a Because an ardent spirit's daring
a Appears absurd or overbearing
a Because we take mere talk for action,
a A cause for solemn satisfaction,
a And mediocrity alone
a At fifty shed all obligation
a Great wealth and rank and reputation;
a Of whom lifelong the verdict ran:
a 'Old X is quite a splendid man.'
a That all our finest aspirations,
a Our brightest dreams and inspirations,
a Have withered with each passing day
a Like leaves dank autumn rots away.
a Or as a sad and raving creature,
a A monster of Satanic feature,
a Eugene (to speak of him again),
a Who'd killed his friend for satisfaction,
a Annoyed with leisure and inaction,
a He felt a restless, vague ambition,
a A craving for a change of air
a A cross not many choose to bear).
a He took up travel for distraction,
a A single feeling in his breast;
a Soon proved a wearisome attraction.
a So he returned one day to fall,
a Like Chatsky, straight from boat to ball.
a A murmur through the ballroom steals . . .
a She casts no brazen glance around
a And makes no effort to astound
a Or use those sorts of affectation
a And artifice that ladies share
a But shows a simple, quiet air.
a She seems the very illustration
a The general with the prideful air.
a One couldn't label her a beauty;
a But neither did her form contain,
a From head to toe, the slightest strain
a To find an adequate translation
a With us the word's an innovation,
a With carefree charm and winsome air
a She took a seat beside the chair
a Of brilliant Nina Voronskaya,
a Called up a face from long ago.
a Who's standing there in conversation
a Beside the Spanish envoy, pray . . .
a 'You have been out of circulation.
a The Larin girl.'' You mean Tatyana!
a However much the situation
a Disturbed her soul and caused her pain,
a However great her shock or strain,
a She gave no hint of agitation:
a No trace of Tanya from the past.
a And when he tried to speak at last,
a When he'd arrived, and if of late
a he'd been back home at his estate
a He took her arm. She moved away . . .
a And left Eugene in mute dismay.
a In that forsaken, distant place
a The one to whom, when face to face,
a Was this that girl... or did he dream?
a He woke to find, with some elation,
a Prince N. had sent an invitation.
a 'Oh God! I'll see her. . . and today!
a Oh yes, I'll go! 'and straightaway
a What's wrong with him? . . . He's in a daze.
a What's stirring in that idle gaze,
a For all the cares of love again?
a Once more he counts the hours, pacing;
a Once more can't wait till day is past.
a The clock strikes ten: and off he's racing,
a And now he's at the porch at last;
a He enters in some apprehension;
a They sit. Eugene can only stare,
a Her husband enters, thus arresting
a They laughed. Then guests began arriving.
a And quite devoid of affectations;
a Good reasoned talk was also heard,
a No lasting truths or dissertations
a The social cream had gathered gaily:
a The faces one encounters daily,
a And several maidens, far from gay
a Unsmiling faces on display;
a Of some most solemn state affair;
a A greybeard too . . . with scented hair,
a In quite a keen, old-fashioned way,
a Which seems a touch absurd today!
a Who's cross with everything about:
a That foggy book they're all debating,
a The badge on those two maids-in-waiting,
a The falsehoods in reviews, the war,
a And here's Prolzov, celebrated
a As you, Saint-Priest, have demonstrated
a Another ballroom king on station
a (Like fashion's very illustration)
a Beside the door stood tightly laced,
a Immobile, mute, and cherub-faced;
a A traveller home from distant faring,
a By his pretentious, studied bearing:
a The sorry sight the fellow made.
a Tatyana . . . only her alone:
a But not the timid maid who'd pleaded,
a This distant goddess so transcendent,
a What's given to us ever palls,
a Incessantly the serpent calls
a She's taken up the role she plays!
a Her lordly rank's commanding ways!
a Who'd dare to seek the tender maiden
a In this serene and glory-laden
a Yet once he'd moved her heart to tears!
a A tender dream that she someday
a Might walk with him life's humble way!
a And barren age has shown its face,
a How sad is faded passion's trace! . . .
a Ignoring reason's condemnation,
a Each day he rides to take his station
a Outside her glassed-in entryway,
a Then follows her about all day.
a In liveried ranks where'er she calls,
a Or fetch her kerchief when it falls.
a She pays him not the least attention,
a She's no coquette in any part
a The monde abhors a fickle heart.
a She doesn't see or doesn't care;
a Onegin, wasting, has the air
a But he refused to go. He's ready
a To join his forebears any day;
a Tatyana, though, stayed calm and steady
a (Their sex, alas, is hard to sway).
a And yet he's stubborn . . . still resistant,
a Than bearing all his pain unheard.
a Her lips express determination
a But where's distress? Commiseration?
a And where the tear stains? . . . Not a trace!
a There's wrath alone upon that face . . .
a And, maybe, secret apprehension
a But he departs, his hopes in tatters,
a And damns his folly in these matters
a Once more he turned to books and sages.
a He read his Gibbon and Rousseau;
a Chamfort, Manzoni, Herder's pages;
a Instructs us in a moral way
a Where I'm so much abused today,
a And yet although his eyes were reading,
a His thoughts had wandered far apart;
a Desires, dreams, and sorrows pleading
a Had crowded deep within his heart.
a Before his gaze. And these alone
a The heart's dark secrets and traditions,
a The mysteries of its ancient past;
a Disjointed dreams obscure and vast;
a A drawn-out tale of fancies grand,
a And letters in a maiden's hand.
a But then as torpor dulled sensation,
a His feelings and his thoughts went slack,
a While in his mind Imagination
a Dealt out her motley faro pack.
a On bivouac; then hears with dread
a A voice proclaim: 'Well then, he's dead!'
a He just about went mad, I fear,
a It's true: by self-hypnotic action,
a My muddled pupil, in distraction,
a When by the hearth he'd sit alone
a His slipper or his magazine!
a The days flew by. The winter season
a Dissolved amid the balmy air;
a He didn't die, or lose his reason,
a Or turn a poet in despair.
a With spring he felt rejuvenated:
a The cell in which he'd hibernated
a Along the Neva's bank by sleigh.
a On hacked-out bluish ice that lay
a Has my Eugene directly hastened?
a The moody fellow, still unchastened,
a Through grand salon. And on! ... All bare.
a That strikes him with such awful pleading?
a Above some letter that she's reading
a She softly sheds a flood of tears.
a Have read her tortured heart at last!
a Have known poor Tanya from the past!
a She shuddered, but she didn't speak,
a Just looked at him her visage bleak
a Without surprise or indignation.
a She saw it all. In desolation,
a What dreams of hers were re-enacted?
a The heavy silence grew protracted,
a A word of candid explanation.
a Onegin, do you still retain
a Some memory of that park and lane,
a Where fate once willed our confrontation,
a And I so meekly heard you preach?
a A little maiden's meek affection
a When I recall how you reacted:
a How nobly in a sense you acted,
a How right toward me that awful day:
a I'm grateful now in every way. . . .
a In our backwoods, as you'll allow,
a Why mark me out for your attention?
a Is it perhaps my new ascension
a To circles that you find more swank;
a Or that I now have wealth and rank;
a Or that my husband, maimed in battle,
a A cause for all the monde to tattle
a Which might in turn bring you some claim
a To social scandal's kind of fame?
a Stern censure in your former fashion
a To this offensive show of passion,
a To all these letters and these tears.
a Oh then at least, my tender years
a You pitied then my girlish dreams. . . .
a Can you, so strong of mind and heart,
a Now stoop to play so base a part?
a Are empty. ... I'd as soon be trading
a This tattered life of masquerading,
a At this unwanted revelation.
a What hitter scorn and condemnation
a I dared not trust in love again:
a I didn't yield to sweet temptation
a And had, it's true, no inclination
a And his sad fate drew us apart. . .
a I tore away my grieving heart;
a But no! Each moment of my days
a To see you and pursue you madly!
a To catch your smile and search your gaze
a With loving eyes that seek you gladly;
a To melt with pain before your face,
a To hear your voice. . . to try to capture
a With all my soul your perfect grace;
a To swoon and pass away . . . what rapture!
a I search on all the paths I wander;
a Yet I in futile dullness squander
a These days allotted me by fate . . .
a Oppressive days indeed of late.
a My span on earth is all but taken,
a But lest too soon I join the dead,
a I need to know when I awaken,
a I'll see you in the day ahead....
a The cunning of a base ambition
a To thirst with love in every part,
a To calm the tumult in one's heart;
a To long to clasp in adoration
a Pour out confessions, lamentation,
a Oh, all that I might then entreat! .  .  .
a And meantime, feigning resignation,
a And hold a placid conversation! . . .
a But let it be: it's now too late
a And I surrender to my fate.
a She left him then. Eugene, forsaken,
a How deep his stricken heart is shaken!
a For my poor hero, we'll adjourn
a And leave him, reader, at his station. . .
a For long . . . forever. In his train
a We've roamed the world down one slim lane
a For long enough. Congratulation
a On reaching land at last. Hurray!
a And long since time, I'm sure you'd say!
a Whatever, reader, your reaction,
a I hope we part in satisfaction. . .
a Or maybe merely faulty grammar
a God grant that in my careless art,
a For fun, for dreaming, for the heart. . .
a For raising journalistic clamour,
a And so let's part; farewell. . . adieu!
a And you, small book, my constant labour,
a My first few stanzas I once read
a As Sadi long before us said.
a Without them my Onegin's fashioned.
a And she from whom I drew, impassioned,
a My fair Tatyana's noblest trait. . .
a Oh, much, too much you've stolen, Fate!
a But blest is he who rightly gauges
a Nor read its novel's final pages;
a 'And happiness was ours ... so nearly!
a It came so close! . . . But now my fate
a Been foolish when I failed to wait;
a But mother with her lamentation
a Implored me, and in resignation
attempt And enmity with harsh contempt;
attempt Who yawned with wife and friends, exempt
brussel He gives a sign the others hustle;
brussel With laughter, kisses, din and hustle;
brussel And with my wilful Muse let's hustle
brussel To where the leafy woodlands rustle
annealing Yes, soon he lost all warmth of feeling:
annealing Devoid of any spark of feeling
annealing For she, in spite of family feeling,
annealing But still, we welcome you with feeling.
annealing He could have shown some spark of feeling
annealing He lay quite still and past all feeling;
annealing Be thinking of... or merely feeling,
annealing Mad with regret and anguished feeling,
annealing Eugene fell down before her, kneeling;
beeping Upon his neighbour's place of sleeping,
allow And haunt their dreams. They worship now
allow The Vampire with his pensive brow,
allow Must occupy my pen for now;
allow I gave my word, but, Lord, I vow,
allow Romp away, sweet lassies, now,
allow Sing our secret ditty now,
allow I vow, Has ever had and hasn't now!
allow But I've no wish to praise you now;
allow Let me repay you with a vow
allow By Baratynsky's pen I vow:
allow Let God's own lightning strike you now!
allow Were your good friend before you now,
allow Stretched out with death upon his brow,
allow My hero and of course I vow
allow I'm not quite in the mood just now.
allow And quite forgot. Its pathway now
allow All weeds. No wreath is on the bough;
allow My god! How stern that haughty brow,
allow What wintry frost surrounds her now!
allow So why do you pursue me now?
allow Where over my poor nanny now
allow there stands a cross beneath a bough.
bights But sweeter still, amid such nights,
bights Are Tasso's octaves' soaring flights.
bights Would muse on passions and their flights.
bights Regretted still his past delights
bights And all that quickens and excites,
bights That sparkles, triumphs, and delights
bights Her share of travel's dull delights:
bights They rode for seven days and nights.
bights Like fair Lenore, on moonlit nights
bights She rode with me those craggy heights!
akali One swats at flies in mindless folly;
addiction And then maintain the shameless fiction
addiction As if today, through some restriction,
addiction Time was, with grave and measured diction,
addiction The hero in his work of fiction
addiction At times he reads her works of fiction
addiction Whose author's powers of depiction
addiction Tatyana heeded with conviction
addiction Believed in dreams and card prediction,
addiction To mend my ways in deeds and diction,
beauties And verses will be common duties.
beauties Your claim upon its joyous duties
closely And, oh, how base to pamper grossly
antitheft Onegin, noting Lensky'd left,
antitheft Which made poor Olga feel bereft.
bunce Love's luring phial, you who once
bunce Made me a drunken, love-filled dunce!)
bunce Assault the senses all at once.
deniro's But even friendships like our heroes
deniro's All sentiments and deem men zeros
abstruse Could answer keenly, be obtuse,
abstruse Put silence cunningly to use,
abstruse In all the sterile words they use
beginner's The time of day by teas and dinners,
beginner's By supper's call. We country sinners
abhorred To take some tea while Dunya poured;
abhorred They whisper: 'Dunya, don't look bored!'
abhorred And Grandison, the noble lord
abhorred (With whom today we're rather bored)
covered Turned south; and all around there hovered
covered While taking leave, Tatyana hovered
affected Just so a youthful rake reflected,
affected By mighty Zeus's will elected
affected Corneille's full genius resurrected;
affected Didelot his crown of fame perfected.
affected So much of life have I neglected
affected His father died quite unexpected,
affected And round Eugene there soon collected
affected The ancient manse had been erected
affected And all its solid form reflected
affected All these were new and unexpected,
affected And so, for once, Eugene elected
affected If her prim tomcat sat protected
affected That guests were soon to be expected;
affected The printed verse had lain neglected
affected But then, by empty dreams deflected,
affected I lost my way and recollected
affected On coming home, the youth inspected
affected Undressed, by candle he selected
affected And at a walk she'll ride, dejected,
affected Her soul, despite herself, infected
affected Assailed by doubts, she grew dejected:
affected He isn't here, I'm not expected. . . .
affected And in the margins she inspected
affected She found Onegin's soul reflected
affected Departure day was long expected;
affected The covered sleigh, for years neglected,
affected They find her stranger than expected,
affected 'Can it be true?' Eugene reflected.
affected From those backwoods!' And he directed
affected Although Eugene with care inspected
affected This placid lady, he detected
affected Where all was shown ... all unprotected?
affected And humble lot he'd once rejected?. . .
affected No answer came. Eugene elected
affected With no reply. He drives, dejected,
affected When first I met you and detected
affected A warmth in you quite unexpected,
behling As others tell of passions swelling;
behling Forgotten in his wretched dwelling,
behling In this forgotten country dwelling
behling Nor known this bitter heartache's swelling.
behling Perhaps, when time had helped in quelling
accrual Convinced that Olga's heart was cruel,
accrual To see that flirt before the duel.
aspersions Our northern summers, though, are versions
coffer My soul cries out and longs to offer
aborted My word, that little devil courted!
arriving The North now howls, the winds are driving
arriving And on the spice of malice thriving,
affections How dull to hear the same objections,
affections To overcome those predilections
affections You may have sought in these reflections
affections Tumultuous, fond recollections,
berish But first in dazzling hope you nourish
berish To see how he may wane or flourish,
berish Oblivion when tempests flourish,
bedevil Escape unscathed ... the slippery devil!
bedevil Out to the mill, where each would level
blushes And wind, the morning's herald, rushes,
blushes But still her heart in panic rushes,
arrested Tatyana, as her nurse suggested,
arrested And so in secret she requested
arrested He sees forgotten foes he'd bested,
arrested Companions whom he now detested . . .
l The lover of Julie Wolmr,
delightful While never meaning to be spiteful;
brontosaurus Falls silent fast. Alone the chorus
brontosaurus The Nereids' eternal chorus
agin And truffles, youth's delight so keen,
agin The very flower of French cuisine,
agin That friend of freedom ruled the scene,
agin Onegin now has left the scene
agin And driven home to change and preen.
agin Beneath the table barely seen,
agin In springtime on the meadow's green,
agin So inaccessibly serene,
agin Mere sight of them brings on the spleen.
agin In maidens' albums, thought it keen
agin Tatyana pictures her Eugene,
agin And in a letter, rash and green,
agin There was a time when I was keen,
agin That no young girl thirteen,
agin Their albums too you must have seen,
agin From frontside, backside, in between.
agin A nameless river's placid scene,
agin The country place where my Eugene,
agin What is it martyred pride, or spleen
agin That marks his face? ... Is that Eugene?!
agin His kinsman and his friend Eugene.
agin The princess looked at him serene;
agin While on the flames he'd drop unseen
another's May his example profit others;
another's But God, what deadly boredom, brothers,
another's Diana's breast is charming, brothers,
another's But I prefer above these others
another's Once more an idler, now he smothers
another's By making his the thoughts of others
another's And in the end were close as brothers.
another's And now from nearby quarters, brothers,
another's The joy and hope of district mothers
another's But those to whom, as friends and brothers,
another's 'Some are no more, and distant. . . others.'
beres Or Cleopatra with his jeers,
bluey Become good friends from sheer ennui.
begun By falling gravely ill, he's won
begun The only clever thing he's done.
begun But pleased to have their duty done,
begun The priests and guests left one by one.
begun The hero's named, the plotting's done;
begun My present novel's Chapter One.
begun And in their dens bewailed as one
begun The dreadful harm of what he'd done.
begun Of liquor, and of hay brought in,
begun A stranger who had wandered in.
begun To hug her parents either one;
begun A child herself, for children's fun
begun Their tendency to just drop in
begun Till father blessed me and gave in.
begun Never come to listen in
begun The more we draw a woman in,
begun To which he yielded one by one,
begun Unmoved to count beneath the sun
begun The bear proclaims: 'My gossip's in.'
begun Leads forth from morning dales the sun
begun All cross themselves and dig right in.
begun Then all the crowd comes pouring in
begun Vladimir vowed he wouldn't run
begun He kept consulting watch and sun . . .
begun His French valet, Guillot, runs in
begun Has withered with the rising sun;
begun The altar fire is out and done!. . .
begun But once you've had your fatal fun,
begun You won't be pleased to see it done.
begun And loathes the awful thing he's done.
begun The poet's gone . . . and hardly one
begun That paying visits does me in;
begun And even simple-minded fun
begun This hollow world has learned to shun!
allusions He entertained with fond illusions
allusions A tempting riddle of confusions;
bender's This homage that the great world tenders,
abide Then trading bows on every side
abide With men he knew or friends he spied,
abide A fair Venetian at my side,
abide Now chatting, now a silent guide,
abide To his estate, where first she cried
abide (With God knows whom on every side),
abide The trees in winter silver dyed,
abide Gay magpies on the lawn outside,
abide And o'er the lacquered boards we glide.
abide Tatyana to our hero's side,
abide Makes off with Lensky's future bride.
abide Had called you out in fiery pride?
abide Well, tell me: what would you . . . inside
abide To live amid the common tide;
abide The flame within him would have died.
abide That now indeed my spring has died
abide And at the altar by his side,
abide She stands beneath the crown a bride,
abide Now carried off by fate, a bride,
abide Forever parted from her side.
abide About the stable, many cried;
abide Then eighteen nags were led outside.
abide Paved highways, linking every side,
abide Will cross our Russia far and wide;
abide The two old ladies hugged and cried,
abide With shouts of joy on either side.
abide While I, mid friends, was drunk with pride
abide My flighty mistress at my side.
abide Her manner stayed the same outside,
abide I know that in your heart reside
abide Both honour and a manly pride.
adhere He sang life's bloom gone pale and sere
adhere With Russian pancakes, Russian cheer;
adhere Beneath this stone now resteth here.
adhere Abandon Hope, Who Enter Here!
adhere Asked Tanya's mother, full of cheer;
adhere They seem to go before they're here!
adhere Sedate Bordeaux's good quiet cheer.
adhere That idol whom ripe misses cheer,
adhere The company commander's here!
adhere The hostess cries, 'At last you're here!'
adhere The answer in his solemn leer.
adhere I have them, and I quote them here:
adhere Repose in peace, young poet, here!'
adhere Would dine with him in winter here.
adhere That sorceress the winter's here!
adhere Oh, Tanya sweet, come over here
adhere With shouts of joy and welcome cheer.
adhere That I'd have been the first to cheer!)
collisions Who never knew exotic visions,
boundless All thoughts of time returning groundless;
brimming He calls a sleigh as daylight's dimming;
brimming His collar with its beaver trimming
ascendant And there ... ethereal... resplendent,
ascendant A frosty night, the sky resplendent
ascendant But this cool princess so resplendent,
dimmers Crisp days when sunlit hoarfrost glimmers,
dimmers The sleighs, and rosy snow that shimmers
alatorre No secret crimes or passions gory
alatorre A Russian family's age-old story,
alatorre At the beginning of my story
alatorre I wanted with Albani's glory
alatorre But forward, forward, O my story!
alatorre It wears with pride its recent glory:
completely With misty eyes he looks on sweetly
completely Or sometimes Idol mio sweetly
beginning Eugene, with secret malice grinning,
aisle His blend of banter and of bile,
aisle His sombre wit and biting style.
aisle Her sky-blue eyes, devoid of guile,
aisle Her flaxen curls, her lovely smile,
aisle I find a faultless Russian style
aisle Like crimson lips without a smile,
aisle There's not a calumny too vile
aisle Confused with tender shame the while
aisle (Encouraged, though, by Olga's smile),
aisle But what of our Eugene this while?
aisle I'll tell it all in detailed style
aisle Already has she mastered guile,
aisle Already learned to cheat and smile!
aisle Her lowered eyes aflame the while,
aisle And on her lips a slender smile.
aisle The sick old lady's kindly smile
aisle Childe Harold? Melmoth for a while?
aisle 'T would make an epigram of style. . . .
aisle But where's our lady all this while?)
aisle He has no voice. Without a smile,
aisle But one persistent thought the while.
abets To crush a rivaloh, what nets,
abets In quick succession silhouettes
abets Of ladies and their modish pets.
abets For private and for other debts;
abets Who gained in turn, without regrets,
abets The nobly born and fashion's pets;
abets The fools one never once forgets;
g But when the age of restless turnings
g While Petersburg, already rousing,
g Pours forth a maiden's blameless plighting.
g Instead, her silken sash untying,
g Or what if he himself, not thinking,
g Those heady walks for which you're thirsting,
could His father never understood
could 'Won't call me "sir" the way he should.
could ' The general verdict wasn't good.
could As far as Lensky's wedding stood,
could They knew they'd settled that for good.
could The ever dauntless hero stood
could Prepared to die for love of good;
could The distant vault of heaven's hood;
could The nightingale in darkest wood
could In pledge of beauty and of good,
biting And propped upon an elbow, writing,
biting With tea too sweet to be inviting,
blush And, whistling, fires with a rush.
blush The rutted snow had turned to slush;
blush But where in such a headlong rush
boarders Would hear the bailiff, give his orders,
accruing Then Olga's suitor came a-wooing.
accruing 'But tell me, what's your friend been doing?'
accruing As mouths start chewing.
disappearing Creeps to the door and, softly peering,
another Ongin, my good friend and brother,
another Or sparkled in one way or other.
another 'And really you prefer the other?'
another 'Why not?'' Were I the poet, brother,
another Why, my good husband's sainted mother
another And been a faithful wife and mother,
another Recall the satirist, good brother,
another And his sly odist in The Other
another In silence to destroy each other. . . .
another Should each not part once more as brother? . . .
biomes That splendid view of distant domes,
biomes Of churches, belfries, stately homes!
bitten Some army scribbler will have written
bitten A roguish rhyme to tease the smitten.
bitten By thoughts of fame and freedom smitten,
bitten What odes indeed he might have written,
aborting Sed alia temporal Such sporting
aborting (With other capers such as courting)
accent There too, beneath the theatre's tent,
accent My fleeting, youthful days were spent.
accent Oh, happy he who's known the ferment
accent 'Goodbye, Onegin . . . time I went.'
accent But where are all your evenings spent?'
accent The letter's ready all but sent. . .
accent To tell you how this meeting went
accent And what ensued from that event;
accent Is Saturday. Her mother's sent
accent Now don't refuse, it's time you went.'
accent What secret message she'd been sent,
accent 'What's wrong?' She peered at him, intent.
accent 'It's nothing.' And away he went.
accent Sweet wilderness in which I spent
advection He lacked, it's true, all predilection
advection But knew by heart a fine collection
advection For him enchantment's deep infection
advection Is gone; the snake of recollection
advection The young man's blissful, brief infection;
advection Believing in the world's perfection;
advection Beneath a shady park's protection
advection She lacked the slightest predilection,
advection And beg you for your kind protection.
advection And on the leaves of recollection,
advection Mute monument to fond reflection:
advection Thus you, Yazykov, with perfection,
advection Sweet elegies, whose full collection
advection Oh, God, my friend, what sheer perfection
advection Another with his love's perfection
advection With something of his true complexion
advection His endless bent for deep reflection,
advection And steer for now a new direction,
advection What answer came? Just stern rejection.
abstentions Can be excused his rash intentions.
adjourned My secret shame, had I discerned
cope And bind him tighter with our rope;
cope Let's prick vainglory first with hope,
acquire It's sacred to Apollo's choir;
acquire A spirit strange but full of fire,
acquire And found the source of lyric fire
acquire But Lensky, having no desire
acquire Could alter Lensky's deep desire,
acquire His soul aflame with virgin fire.
acquire And it may touch some heart with fire;
acquire In vain my searching eyes enquire,
acquire It may be he was born to fire
acquire She'd been condemned to feel desire:
acquire While some rude Cyclops at his fire
acquire Is it because we never tire
acquire While none held head and shoulders higher
acquire With all her marble beauty's fire
acquire In such a burst of moral fire,
acquire He'd lectured gravely on desire?
acquire Stood seared, as if by heaven's fire.
acquire With what a tempest of desire!
beatings I'll give a father's simple greetings,
beatings I'll show the children's secret meetings
bidden To eat the master's fruit when hidden,
bidden Between the printed lines lay hidden
ascendance Fate watched Eugene in his dependence;
b Now my Eugene, Chadyev's double,
b From jealous critics fearing trouble,
b But if indeed I overborrow,
b That all of Russia scarcely numbers
b Two special feet. And in my slumbers
b I recollect the ocean rumbling:
b Those rushing tides in tumult tumbling
b So rend my soul, so flame my blood.
b He found the manor fairly bustling
b By lonely fields and burbling brook,
b Or, God forbid, some wretched breeder
b Of twisted slanders might combine
b To fevered rhyme: for thus he doubles
b Subduing passion's host of troubles,
b A glance in any other book.
b The old corve and substituted
b Unseen by bee or butterfly.
b When earth's horizon softly blushes,
b Still longer half the globe encumbers,
b And late the lazy East still slumbers
b In all her schemes he'd never probe;
b And ate and drank in just his robe.
b At Trinity, when service brings
b Lamented much by friend and neighbour,
b To glimpse the Larins' brand new neighbour;
b An aged uncle's in my book;
b By ancient lindens near the brook,
b She yields without conditions, boldly
b Immodestly I'd seek to borrow
b Enchanting, yet so fraught with trouble?
b A living picture's pallid double,
b It's grey Filtievna, who's bringing
b 'Oh nurse, your wits are all befuddled!'
b She flies and breaks through lilac bushes,
b With choral song as they'd been bidden
b And halt the constant surge of blushes;
b My mind and will are almost broken,
b Long dormant feelings, scarce remembered.
b In wedlock we would both be broken.
b From dream to dream a passage brief;
b You futile, searching phantom-breeder,
b Where girlfriends scribble hopes and blisses
b A hunter hidden in the brush
b Long rambles, reading, slumber's blisses,
b A horse of spirit fit to bridle,
b Like Hippocrene it sparkles brightly,
b You dropped in twice and closed the book;
b In toast to his attractive neighbour . . .
b A bold kibitka skips and burrows
b A distance luminous and boundless. . . .
b The grunting, loathesome bear still lumbers,
b Before them now a forest slumbers;
b A tiny window glitters brightly,
b He laughs they all guffaw and bustle;
b All point at her and all combine
b Two Petriads, a grammar book,
b The name-day feast that's just begun.
b The hall is full of crowds and bustle;
b And my first cousin, good Buynov,
b (Alas, too salty); now they're bringing,
b His moment of revenge beginning,
b He wrote thus limply and obscurely.
b Though he's unknown and lives obscurely,
b Not aiming yet, the foes took boldly
b Those joyous hopes that bloomed so brightly
b A simple stone adjoins the brook.
b But one glance back. Farewell, you bowers,
b Now greets the dawning season brightly.
b Load up your carriages to bursting,
b Although her tears were all too brief!
b Or lulled by Lethe, has he slumbered,
b His blissful spirit unencumbered
b And soon the open doorway beckoned.
b 'Our neighbour Lensky, lately buried,
b But now it's late. The winds are blowing,
b Sealed off at last from everybody,
b 'Why, my dear lady, what's the bother?
b Above our waters iron bridges
b Oh, cousin, do you still remember
b 'He lives in Moscow. This December,
b And yet the regal moon shines brighter
b The countryside, poor village neighbours,
b Beside a limpid flowing brook,
b That lady in the red beret?'
b And here's a chap whose words are biting,
b But to the young its raptures bring
b Quite other lines that rose unbidden
b Have brought you to my feet? What blindness!
b For that small churchyard's shaded bowers,
b Farewell, you too, my moody neighbour,
aught He racked his brains and rather thought
aught That miracles could still be wrought.
aught For argument or food for thought:
aught The fruits that learned science brought,
aught Above the chessboard deep in thought,
aught Or so at least with joy he thought.
aught A roving pedlar one day brought
aught Of youthful feeling, youthful thought,
aught Exalted, tender, boldly wrought?
aught From here he watched, immersed in thought,
aught The awesome blaze my Moscow wrought.
aught And drove back home, immersed in thought;
aught Disturbed the slumber that he sought.
arup At dusk or entre chien et loup
arup No longer cheered the family group.
arup Her lancer had to join his troop.
arup And at her frightened cry a troop
arup Of household urchins with a whoop
bloated Some others too might well have noted
bloated Was at the time in full devoted
booted A backwoods genius, he commuted
abbett His clothing for the learned set.
abbett And yet, How long it took me to forget
abbett This Grandison was fashion's pet,
abbett That wedding plans had long been set,
abbett And then postponed till they could get
abbett But you're not even listening, pet.'
abbett I'm sick at heart and all upset,
abbett No trace at all of last night's fret,
abbett Your cheeks are poppies now, my pet.'
abbett Stand fizzing on the table yet;
abbett With evening's gloom, the day has set. . .
abbett With nothing that it must regret,
abbett With all of life before it yet
abbett And sees the truth: she loves him yet!
abbett Tormented now by deep regret,
abbett And come to know a new regret;
abbett And I lament old sorrows yet.
abbett The same old patterns still are met:
abbett And wears that same tulle bonnet yet;
abbett In our day too, let's not forget),
abbett But though it's won no favour yet,
abbett 'Can that be she? ... It seems . . . and yet. . .
abbett This most unpleasant tete-a-tete;
abbett The pranks and fun when first they'd met.
abbett But I can't blame you or forget
bentley Tatyana blushed and trembled gently.
bentley Onegin stares at her intently,
bentley Then draws her to a corner gently
bentley Eugene would hear his views intently
bentley He'd sit at clavichord intently
bentley And play but chords; or turning gently
bither Here practised dandies bow and slither
bither Hussars on leave come racing hither
alerted So books, like women, he deserted,
alerted 'In all this world what's more perverted
alerted Bemoans her worthless mate, deserted
alerted But now, as in a house deserted,
alerted The window boards have been inserted,
alike His grumbling soul the hours strike,
abair And our Katnin gave us there
abair But neither whist, nor gossip there,
abair Some serf girls in the orchard there,
abair His incandescent Olga there.
abair 'Good God, man, where's your second? Where?'
abair The restless hero waiting there
abair Galop, mazurka, waltz. . . . And there,
abair 'Just never mind . . . now look up there . . .
abair Than he who brought the lady there
abair Is quite alone. Some minutes there
abair He opens up a door. . . . What's there
benighted The moment one of them was sighted
benighted Or heard approaching uninvited,
benighted And then the guest would be invited
benighted Then bring in her guitar, excited . . .
benighted But wretched he who's too far-sighted,
benighted The girls all jump and grow excited.
benighted The girls near Tanya; men delighted
benighted And leaves her languid soul ignited:
benighted The good old lady was delighted
benighted Ah, friends, I too have been delighted
benighted When all at once far-off I've sighted
benighted He scrawled a note: he 'd be delighted.
benighted What's made that frigid soul excited?
binion Throughout that barren, dim dominion
binion And Lensky formed a low opinion
binion What's more, the husband's frank opinion
binion And so your mistress (faithful minion)
binion For jibes .. and all his foul dominion.
binion So there it is the mob's opinion!
alroy Refreshed the stage with comic joy,
alroy But I'll present you now with joy.'
alroy 'Who is she, though?' 'My wife, old boy.'
alroy In love with Tanya like a boy;
alroy By thoughts of love, by dreams of joy.
ahold While next to Limburg's lively mould
ahold Sits ananas in splendid gold.
ahold They still assail a soul grown cold
ahold And on my heart retain their hold.
ahold Quite charmed her heart when they were told
ahold On winter nights all dark and cold.
ahold The mystery that those pages told
ahold And watched a different world unfold.
ahold The glory of our days of old,
ahold The trembling dreams the heart can hold.
ahold Indifferent to the views they hold,
ahold And to their passions ever cold.
ahold And could she now have been so bold,
ahold So unconcerned with him ... so cold?
ahold To you, I'm sure, was trite and old.
ahold Oh God! my blood can still turn cold
besant With kindly neighbours sometimes present
atop One has a rooster's head on top;
atop A goateed witch is on a mop;
atop From two to thirty at the top;
bauers The country, love, green fields and flowers,
bauers With what delight I praise those hours
bauers Betwixt her chores and idle hours
bauers She learned to use her woman's powers
bauers But I my fancy's fruits and flowers
bauers Am quite content to read for hours
bauers Impassioned days and idle hours,
bauers And sometimes in the evening hours
bauers Two maidens used to come with flowers,
bauers Of our old home, its walks and flowers,
bruch Had choked her maiden breast too much:
bruch Her soul awaited . . . someone's touch.
bruch In passing that I speak as much
bruch Of feasts and foods and corks and such
baiul's Are nothing more to us than tools . . .
baiul's Since feelings are for freaks and fools.
baiul's And have they not, the charming fools,
baiul's Distorted sweetly all the rules
airer To meet a black-robed monk by error,
airer She'd be quite overcome with terror,
amit Her rapid, dazzling, dancing feet.
amit On ladies he has yet to meet.
amit The charming ladies twirl their feet
amit Three pairs of shapely feet...
amit Their charming words and glances sweet
amit Are quite as faithless as their feet.
amit Or suddenly from Million Street
amit Beneath a verse left incomplete,
amit The shapes of ladies' heads and feet.
amit And on arrival duly meet
amit Those words with which before the feet
amit The guests all bow and scrape their feet,
amit Petrovsky Castle. Hey! Be fleet!
amit And now along Tverskya Street
amit The whirling flash of pairs of feet,
amit Your knees . . . and, sobbing at your feet,
bowels And laughs out loud between his howls,
bowels While through the glass his mother scowls.
allender How keen his glance, how bold and tender;
allender You left no prints, no pressings tender,
allender And he believed that men would tender
allender And leave no trace, however slender.
allender With such a rashness in surrender,
allender And with a heart that's warm and tender?
allender Who taught her then this soft surrender,
allender This careless gift for waxing tender,
allender Of long-stemmed glasses . . . (quite as slender
allender To all my youthful verses tender,
allender Awaited here, in vain, surrender
allender For kneeling Moscow's hand to tender
allender In sad Moldavia she turned tender
allender Oh, blest who in his youth was tender;
allender Who learned to bear, without surrender,
allender A swarm of dreams, both sad and tender,
allender To love all ages yield surrender;
allender A blessing bountiful and tender
avedisian And even now, my dearest vision,
avedisian I wait for you . . . and your decision:
avedisian Alas, with well-deserved derision!
avedisian He shuts the book and, with decision,
avedisian And feverish with lyric vision,
avedisian Takes up his stand in indecision.
avedisian At thirty steps with fine precision,
avedisian What aims . . . what hopes do I envision
avedisian What wicked and deserved derision
cover But round it boredom seems to hover;
cover On scaring off some timid lover
cover Was it not you who seemed to hover
cover Above my bed, a gentle lover,
cover And so? Inebriated lover,
cover And there the nightingale, spring's lover,
cover Since young Tatyana with her lover,
demurely I shrink with shame and fear. But surely,
demurely That's not romanticism, surely;
demurely He's still an honest chap, most surely.
demurely How changed Tatyana is! How surely
amending The Muse appeared as love was ending
amending Once free, I seek again the blending
amending Or some young girl from town who's spending
amending Her summer in the country mending
alight Express himself and even write;
alight In dancing too his step was light,
alight Perform her soaring, soulful flight?
alight Devises to attract the sight,
alight Or manufactures for delight,
alight Its countless lampions burning bright;
alight To keep your daughters well in sight;
alight Don't lower your lorgnettes at night!
alight He sleeps in blissful, sheer delight
alight Who turns each morning into night.
alight When midnight sky is limpid-light
alight The river gay and sparkling bright,
alight The balmy fragrance of the night!
alight Like convicts sent in dreaming flight
alight We're now no longer fit to write
alight On any theme but our own plight.
alight With stillness, stars, the lonely night,
alight And with the moon's celestial light
alight And slowly day begins its flight.
alight In winter, when the shade of night
alight Still stir my heart at times to flight:
alight I'd grieve to quit this world's dim light
alight Just killing time that way each night?'
alight 'Why not at all.'' Well, serves you right;
alight 'I'm not.'' Well then, why not tonight?
alight They'll welcome us with great delight.'
alight Tatyana tosses through the night
alight And wakes her nurse to share her plight.
alight Her lovely shoulder to the night.
alight But now the moonbeams' glowing light
alight Amid the stillness of the night,
alight And said a prayer to soothe my plight?
alight Flit softly through this lucent night?
alight To whisper hope and sweet delight?
alight Scarce mindful of their love or spite.
alight Just so a casual guest at night
alight With sinless dreams of sweet delight.
alight An epigram of cunning spite
alight But madrigals they'll have you write!
alight And by the matchwood's crackling light
alight She spins away the wintry night.
alight Vivacious, brilliant. . . and too light.
alight But you, Bordeaux, I find just right;
alight Beheld outdoors a wondrous sight:
alight The roofs, the yard, the fence all white;
alight In sunset's glow, the murky light
alight That wraps about the Yuletide night.
alight The frozen windows sparkling bright,
alight Assails her heart, he brings her light,
alight And sleeps beside her through the night.
alight 'The colonel's sending it tonight.'
alight There'll be a ball! What sheer delight!
alight While Lensky rages at the sight.
alight Could get two friends prepared to fight,
alight Then lead them to the duelling site;
alight With conscience as his judge of right,
alight First off, he'd been at fault last night
alight His heart, so full of pain, drew tight;
alight Or arrow passes by - all's right:
alight The hours of waking and of night
alight He might have scaled a lofty height.
alight His martyred shade, condemned to night,
alight Beneath the moonbeams' silver light
alight And climbed a gentle hill by night.
alight And hung the limbs of oaks with white;
alight In wavy carpets glistening bright;
alight But just for show, as if to spite
alight Lies Moscow with its stones of white,
alight With golden crosses, ember-bright.
alight Ivan Petrovich ... no more bright;
alight Semyon Petrovich . . . just as tight;
alight Of dinners stretching out of sight,
alight To look at life as at a rite,
alight However dazzling to the sight
alight Could not eclipse her neighbour's light.
alight Or blush, or suddenly turn white . . .
alight Or press her lips together tight.
alight The conversation sparkled bright;
alight The hostess kept the banter light
alight Sweet thoughts of him in darkest night,
alight While Morpheus still roamed in flight;
alight So marmot-like through winter's night
alight The hearth, the double panes shut tight
alight The princess sits alone in sight,
alight Quite unadorned, her face gone white
alight As in a misty dream at night,
alight First floated dimly into sight
accession Rousseau (permit me this digression)
accession The brilliant madcap of confession.
accession This might well seem an indiscretion,
accession Description, though, is my profession;
accession The poet, feasting on confession,
accession The course of youthful love's progression
accession She takes no note of dawn's procession,
accession Nor does she put her seal's impression
accession Monotonous and mad procession,
accession Each pair a blur in quick succession,
accession To sit and watch the grand procession
accession Before the hostess in succession,
accession Like spectres in a bleak procession.
accession That figure with the strange expression?
accession It's hard to face a long succession
accession And trail the seemly crowd's procession
accession For several minutes in succession
accession Upon the lady whose expression
accession He got so lost in his depression,
accession Or else turned poet (an obsession
baetz With no great palaces, no streets,
baetz Takes in their ravishing deceits!
blindness Aroused in you some hint of kindness;
aggressive Finds even joy at times excessive,
aggressive When one gets old, life turns oppressive.'
cheaply Yet still Onegin slumbers deeply.
cheaply But now the sun climbs heaven steeply,
abreast That sees in sounds life's highest quest,
abreast The cold sharp mind that he possessed;
abreast I was embittered, he depressed;
abreast Was quite a lovely country nest,
abreast Would thank his stars to be so blest.
abreast And flock to tranquil wisdom's crest;
abreast Pursuing belles with little zest;
abreast Betrayed, was always glad to rest.
abreast He treads the ice with care to test. . .
abreast While on the floor Triquet's at rest
abreast In tattered nightcap and his vest.
abreast As if a chilling hand had pressed
abreast So he might lunch with them as guest,
abreast With nasty gossip or a jest. . . .
abreast And only nanny might have guessed,
abreast But her old wits were slow at best.
abreast He reads them out like one possessed,
abreast Like drunken Delvig at a fest!
abreast His languid brow looked strange at rest.
abreast O  spring! ... O time of love's unrest!
abreast And may his dear old bones be blest
abreast In Mother Earth where he's at rest.'
abreast Where fingernails had sharply pressed;
abreast These lines more quickly than the rest.
abreast Some pots and basins, and the rest
abreast Well, almost all that they possessed.
abreast Let's all go have a nice long rest. . . .
abreast The earth she walks, in splendour dressed!
abreast And in those days when I was blest,
abreast But journeys too, like all the rest,
curled At last he's ready for the world!
curled That endless chant the waves unfurled
curled In praise of him who made the world.
allmond He once again rejects the monde.
abott In something somehow, have we not?
abott A little learning means a lot.
abott Of passions and escaped their lot;
abott More happy he who knew them not,
abott A tale of lovers and their lot,
abott The evening samovar grew hot;
abott In swirls about the china pot.
abott For trumpeting its happy lot
abott In taking joy while loving not.
abott Here's Pradt or, better, Walter Scott!
abott Or check accounts. You'd rather not?
abott And finally left it when they bought
abott Some feeling for Tatyana's lot,
abott Or if, unconsciously or not,
abott A brace of pistols and a shot
abott Shall instantly decide his lot.
abott I'll glance at house and garden plot.'
abott The world for just a time forgot,
abott Tatyana wept and mourned her lot. . .
abott The monde, the noisy ball forgot;
abott Some general stared her way a lot.
acquit And how the ladies' eyes he lit
acquit With flashes of his sudden wit!
acquit My dear Elvina, I adore it
acquit In winter with the hearth before it,
acquit Or go on dropping words of wit
acquit With throbbing head about to split:
acquit We still, alas, cannot forestall it
acquit The spleen is what the English call it,
acquit But by the third he couldn't stick it:
acquit But what's the point? I'd like to know it.
acquit 'You wrote to me. Do not deny it.
acquit For rhyme, saw fit to resurrect it
acquit Would praise him for his nasty grit:
acquit Shoot pistol at an ace and hit;
acquit Both river and the shores that flank it.
acquit And all worn out, she wept a bit,
acquit Then broke into a coughing fit.
acquit From where the smug and worthless sit?
acquit Because the dull are cramped by wit?
acquit And no one's ears were shocked a bit
acquit By all the flow of lively wit.
acquit But if you knew the anguish in it:
abjure Is just another lantern's blur.
abjure And to her doll, without demur,
abjure Atop the stove to wash and purr,
abiding They're all aboard and, slowly gliding,
abiding Farewell, secluded place of hiding!
abiding He enters like a dead man, striding
abiding Through empty hall; then passes, gliding,
abend And though the language of my friend
abend At first disturbed me, in the end
abend That, like proud Byron, I have penned
abend A mere self-portrait in the end;
abend I don't know why; but in the end
abend It hardly mattered to my friend,
abend Would listen gravely to the end
abend When self-expression gripped his friend;
abend Right then and there Vladimir penned
abend A funeral verse for his old friend.
abend If you were with me still, my friend,
abend Your genius for a worthy end:
abend In pledge of meeting you, my friend;
abend You'll be my guardian till the end. . . .
abend What roses Hymen means to send
abend Quite possibly for years on end!
abend Who won't betray us in the end?
abend Our words and deeds as we intend?
abend Are entered by each would-be friend
abend Diminished, lengthened, turned on end.
abend (Those dreams and harmonies I tend)
abend To my old nurse, my childhood's friend;
abend My last poor pence . . . remember, friend?
abend Its magic stream brought forth no end
abend To share a quiet evening's end.
abend Long live Bordeaux, our noble friend!
abend 'Why not at all, they just intend
abend To have the family, that's all, friend;
abend Well, she's just promised his good friend
abend What's this he hears? Could she intend? . . .
abend Holds but oblivion in the end.
abend The voice of lover, foe, and friend
abend They squeeze her hand and, in the end,
abend Take Tanya in and call her friend;
abend and whether you be foe or friend,
abend As comrades now. Whatever end
congestive The jealous poet's mood turned festive!
congestive He'd been, till now, uncertain. . . restive,
doubting Out of a dog-face horns are sprouting;
doubting A haughty skeleton sits pouting
abuses Like flighty Venus when she chooses
alfieri Our bold Autmedons stay cheery,
assistant Still hopeful and indeed persistent.
bloem Nor did he care what secret tome
bloem His daughter read or kept at home
bloem Then swift as arrows raced for home.
bloem Farewell, celestial beauty's home,
accel Who'd ask for more? The world could tell
accel That he had wit and charm as well.
accel And economics he knew well;
accel Which is to say that he could tell
accel For marriage bonds or wedding bell,
accel The chance to know Onegin well.
accel Nor pleasure's rounds, nor learning's well,
accel Nor foreign beauties' magic spell,
accel Martyn Zadck cannot dispel;
accel The frightful vision must foretell
accel Eight rubbers; and eight times as well
accel Now tea is brought. I like to tell
accel It called him out and did it well.
accel The bee flies out from waxen cell
accel To claim its meed from field and dell.
accel And soft seductive nights as well.
accel Into the fields, my friends, pell-mell!
accel She stepped inside the empty shell
accel Where once our hero used to dwell.
accel Inside that modish bachelor cell.
accel It's cold and dark within the dell.
accel That work of heaven or of hell,
accel That angel. . . and proud fiend as well.
accel Retainers crowd the gate pell-mell
accel And fled afar . . . and she as well.
accel My gentle Muse's magic spell
accel Who was at twenty fop or swell,
accel And then at thirty, married well,
blinking Two slender, icebound poles lie linking
blinking And full of doubt, her spirits sinking,
blinking Some bagatelle when you'd been drinking;
adheres To greet an entrechat with cheers,
adheres Grande Dame of lofty social spheres?
adheres And cheek in hand as down she peers,
aaker 'The man's a boor, he's off his rocker.'
aaker Won't kiss a lady's hand, the mocker.'
abductees In trade for tallow and for trees;
abductees When suddenly far off it sees
abductees The hunter hiding in the trees.
abductees By tyrant-fashion's high decrees,
abductees Then gives her hand a gentle squeeze;
abductees In hopes that he (on charge) might squeeze
abductees The ancient Kremlin's hallowed keys.
abductees But Moscow never bent her knees,
abductees The mix of years and ranks she sees.
boff Darlings, then, let's scamper off,
'til Of steady labour made him ill,
'til And nothing issued from his quill;
'til The doubts that plagued his heart and will;
'til The goal of life, he found, was still
'til Her husband at the time was still
'til Her fiance against her will!
'til Who haunts your thoughts and writer's quill,
'til Your tears and rhymes and what-you-will?
'til You're burning up!'' Oh, do be still,
'til I'm . . . you know, nurse ... in love, not ill.'
'til Good night.' She's now alone. All's still.
'til The moonlight shines upon her sill.
'til With such a lively mind and will,
'til And with a spirit never still,
'til And reverently I guard it still;
'til And cannot ever read my fill.
'til Or Freischutz played with timid skill
'til By fingers that are learning still.
'til He drinks all drink and all grow shrill;
'til He frowns and all of them grow still.
'til To faint; but deep within her, will
'til And strength of mind were working still,
'til And there the ploughman rests at will
'til And women reapers come to fill
'til Amid the tumult and the still,
'til Life's essence . . . and enjoyed my fill.
'til The darkness wanes, but Tanya still
'til Near waters sparkling in the still,
'til The Muse first came to make me thrill.
'til Or does he play the outcast still?
'til What role does he intend to fill?
'til Where she sits waiting . . . waiting still!
'til If you recall your Tanya still,
'til I'd much prefer words harsh and chill,
altogether And while the horses, bored at tether,
altogether Curse masters and beat palms together;
altogether Will freedom come and cut my tether?
altogether Whenever nanny brought together
altogether They sit in Olga's room together;
adhered Off to be charmed by dreams and cheered,
adhered But then her course abruptly veered,
cleanly And read my Apuleius keenly,
arrests Approaches Olga . . . idly jests,
arrests Then spins her round before the guests;
arrests And over wine she sang for guests;
ad-hoc But pantaloons, gilet, and frock
ad-hoc These words are hardly Russian stock;
h The prejudice that haunts all history,
h To be the first who thus shall honour
h Up in that stupid sky you honour.'
h Relying on a tyrant's honour,
h When men of reason and good humour
h 'You're married! Really?'' On my honour.
h Our Mother Eve's disastrous history:
boarder Their rings are drawn in random order;
boarder She finds in alphabetic order
adhering Damns poetry for interfering
adhering He's brought some news to set them cheering:
adhering And starts to sing, off-key. Loud cheering
borrow Some fables he could sell tomorrow,
borrow 'The morning star will gleam tomorrow,
borrow 'The other. . . . But we'll talk tomorrow;
adherence Without a foreword's interference,
adherence The strangeness of his interference
allusion On yielding rugs in rich profusion;
allusion Of glory, country, proud seclusion.
allusion In search of pleasure's sweet profusion;
allusion I'll float in gondola's seclusion;
allusion The manor house, in proud seclusion,
allusion Screened by a hill from wind's intrusion,
allusion As yet unmarked by disillusion
allusion Farewell, O golden games' illusion!
allusion He fell in love with dark seclusion,
allusion Perhaps (a flattering hope's illusion!)
allusion For this may all be mere illusion,
allusion While Fate intends no grand conclusion. . . .
allusion Well, this was my Eugene's conclusion.
allusion Of every raging mad delusion,
allusion Then Olga enters in confusion,
allusion Unbidden guests for their intrusion;
allusion And many more. But her confusion
allusion Sad times to come and disillusion.
allusion In philosophical seclusion
allusion (And does so still, have no illusion)
allusion He lays a hand, as in confusion,
allusion Express not pain, but death's intrusion.
allusion He left his home in disillusion
allusion And fled the woods' and fields' seclusion,
acquired Some would that ladies be required
acquired Just now though, friends, I feel too tired
acquired I've talked so long that I've required
acquired 'Had I in any way desired
acquired Or had a happy fate required
acquired Then gave her spouse a look so tired,
abboud A bold mazurka grips the crowd,
abboud The press intense, the hubbub loud;
abboud And over all that dusty crowd
abboud He draped a linen mourning shroud.
abboud With tenderness and pain imbued,
abboud Had hungered for the fatal food;
abboud Because she's trusting more than proud,
abboud And by the Heavens was endowed
abboud (A prize to make the French feel proud!).
abboud Like noble Regulus, he bowed,
abboud Before the dull and frigid crowd;
abboud A brazen chap all starched and proud,
abboud Provoked amusement in the crowd
copher Whenever dazzling ladies proffer
acquires Its token beauty stokes the fires,
acquires The wilful swarm of hot desires.
acquires And where are stormy love's desires,
acquires And where are you, poetic fires,
acquires I've learned the voice of new desires
acquires The first within me light no fires,
acquires Across the river, smoky fires
closes Where sweet Thalia calmly dozes,
closes Indifferent to admirers' roses;
closes The aged ladies, decked in roses,
closes In bonnets and malignant poses;
closes But where such madrigals and roses
accede Of chosen ones whom men should heed,
accede A happy and immortal breed,
accede Like him, she dressed as taste decreed.
accede 'This was a poet, yes indeed!'
accede She fell in love. For thus indeed
accede Does spring awake the buried seed.
accede Just tell me, dearest, what you need.
accede Your honour's all the pledge I need,
accede And judge me both by word and deed.
accede And flies uphill with all his speed;
accede No more at dawn does shepherd need
accede A family with a single creed,
accede All sons of boredom's endless greed.
accede When in a frenzied state indeed
accede He'd plunged in mud from Kalmuk steed,
accede To halt just there her panting steed;
accede The choice of books seemed strange indeed;
accede To which Eugene paid special heed,
accede You've guessed already. Yes, indeed:
accede Has flown to Tanya's in his need.
bruns 'Lovely maidens, pretty ones,
afloat On balls I madly used to dote:
afloat Or for the passing of a note.
afloat Seem sweet as youthful sins remote,
afloat Or verse that Bogdanovich wrote.
afloat Just sits with lowered head, remote;
afloat Upon the letter that she wrote.
afloat And stuff him with the play I wrote;
afloat In crosses or a jotted note,
afloat Or in the question mark he wrote.
afloat Four years consumptive, sad to note.
blurs To help her with her shawl or furs,
blurs To touch a torrid hand to hers,
abrade A mere exchange of looks conveyed
closed His arid vanity exposed,
affecting Yet in its mirror not reflecting
affecting Diana's visage recollecting
across She beat the maids when she was cross
across And left her husband at a loss.
across Tatyana murmured, at a loss;
across To lend a hand to help her cross.
alum Of me the world shall soon grow dumb;
alum But thou, fair maiden, wilt thou come!
aloys For she was bored by all their noise,
aloys Their laughing shouts and giddy joys.
aloys The drawing room explodes with noise,
aloys With bark of pugs and maidens' joys,
aloys It still retains its pristine joys:
aloys Moustaches, leaps, heel-pounding noise
aloys For storms and feasts and worldly noise,
aloys For all your gifts and all your joys;
aloys I leave your world of quiet joys
aloys For empty glitter, fuss, and noise!
aloys This world of glitter, fumes, and noise,
aloys For just my books, the simple joys
deliver Or floating on the drowsy river,
deliver Or plaintive horn would make us shiver.
deliver She walked and walked . . . till with a shiver
deliver A garden by the glinting river.
deliver The grove's asleep above the river,
deliver Behind the hill the moon's a sliver;
deliver It's true! The lady didn't shiver,
deliver Or even let an eyebrow quiver,
cities And you, my sentimental pretties
c A London dandy, hair all curled,
c And mortgaged all the land he could.
c And then await sweet recompense.
c The hearts of even skilled coquettes!
c And the majestic, antlered cuckold
c His double glass he calmly centres
c Shall I abandon every scruple
c To those with lavish whims and coffers,
c Our Academic Lexicon.
c The foot of sweet Terpsichore.
c The merchant's up, the pedlar scurries,
c And meantime I've just now completed
c He'd calland right away discussion
c Eugene, of course, had keen perceptions
c And since each rule permits exceptions,
c More often, though, my two recluses
c In any novel you'll discover
c Prepares in play for protocol,
c The clever husband chose correctly
c To take his grieving bride directly
c Amid this peaceful life they cherished,
c Through silent woods and so discovers
c But what did I, amazed, discover?
c And so she turned for love's discussion
c And Gallicisms in a sentence
c And I submit to it securely.
c Or trying gravely to convince
c When all agree and have long since;
c And been as happy ... as I could!
c They passed the garden's dark recesses,
c And whisper to each other closely:
c He sometimes even dares to cover
c He draws sweet views of rustic scenery,
c Upon the first page you'll discover:
c While on the last one you'll uncover:
c 'Your elegy lacks all perception,
c ' One might to this take sharp exception,
c Its wondrous veil to stand uncovered;
c The dawn arises cold and cheerless;
c A waddling red-foot goose now scurries
c Whose heart. . . experience has cooled
c Ah, wintertime! . . . The peasant, cheerful,
c On goose's neck a skull seemed cheerful,
c When mid the guests she recognized
c All hooves and trunks grotesque and curving,
c The heated words grow louder, quicken;
c And Lensky falls; the shadows thicken;
c Whist's heroes have by now completed
c But in small town and countryside
c For fooling clever men completely,
c He was no fool; and consequently
c The note was brief in its correctness,
c Politely, but with cold directness,
c Or brawling boy to take offence,
c He craves her pardon so completely,
c Draws back the curtains and his covers,
c To bring Lepage's deadly pieces;
c 'My second?' said Eugene directly.
c A friend of mine, whom you. . . correctly!
c There lies a spot the poet cherished:
c But not today. Although I cherish
c And filled my soul with dreams, content.
c Their downy green and start to thicken.
c The vales grow dry and colours quicken;
c Or saddened by the re-emergence
c We heed the rustling wood's resurgence,
c You rustic Priams from the cities,
c Sings out till dawn; a crimson cover
c A deathly pallor merely covered
c The bosom friend she'd always cherished
c With his immoral soul disclosed,
c She turns all offers down completely,
c The haughty world would watch her closely
c Farewell, my freedom, deeply cherished!
c The featherbeds and coops of chickens,
c The servants fussed and raised the dickens
c Within this strange new domicile
c Still has her friend, Monsieur Finemouch,
c When in the parlour guests converse;
c Of oligarchic colloquies,
c Nor scorned the social mob's decisions;
c ''To whom? How long?'' Some two years since . . .
c ''She knows you?'' We were neighbours, Prince.'
c Was this the Tanya he once scolded
c How quick she's mastered, how securely,
c Her virgin brooding once had cherished
c Neath passion's rains they green and thicken,
c Renew themselves with joy, and quicken;
c He looked the poet so completely
c From all that I had ever cherished
c All that a poet's soul might cherish:
c And I as yet could not uncover
asunder However, reader, we may wonder . . .
asunder 'May I just see the house, I wonder?'
asunder To find Anisya and to plunder
asunder 'Is she in love?'' With whom, I wonder?
asunder And Petushkov as well went under.
brunches The frost already cracks and crunches;
brunches (And you, good reader, with your hunches,
beeps A maiden's looking-glass she keeps.
beeps Now all is hushed. Tatyana sleeps.
acquiescing I longed to join the waves in pressing
acquiescing So meanwhile, friends, enjoy your blessing:
acquiescing Its worthlessness needs no professing,
acquiescing She sighs . . . and in her soul possessing
bever I wouldn't say that ladies never
bever But not at all: as blithe as ever,
bever Like giddy hope so gay and clever,
bever Perhaps has carried off forever
bever And in the tomb his shade shall never
bever And Anna Pavlovna, as ever,
admix Who in an aimless, idle fix
admix Had reached the age of twenty-six,
borth I too there used to saunter forth,
borth But found it noxious in the north.
borth That Cleopatra of the North;
borth But even Nina, shining forth
among And playfully astound the young,
among Or frighten with despairing tongue.
among Some imprecision of the tongue
among Within this breast no longer young;
boal This dreadful ailment's heavy toll;
boal We call it simply Russian soul.
boal The emptiness that plagues his soul
boal I cannot resurrect my soul.
boal But mine must be a brother's role.
boal And, lightly clad, would take a stroll
boal Down to the stream below the knoll.
boal But now a kind and simple soul
boal Who plays an unwed father's role,
boal And face to face with his own soul,
boal Felt far from happy with his role.
boal Her walks were long; a brook or knoll
boal Except to charm her thirsting soul.
boal To keep her fury in control!
boal Onegin stares with all his soul:
beguiled And then Monsieur took on the child,
beguiled A charming lad, though somewhat wild.
beguiled He'd furnish his beloved child
beguiled Forever hounded and reviled
beguiled This note's to him.'' Now don't get riled,
beguiled But you've gone pale again, my child!'
beguiled Of wandering tribes; and like a child,
beguiled She learned their ways and soon grew wild:
adjuster That there exists a holy cluster
adjuster Whose potent light in all its lustre
adjuster No fine parquet could hope to muster
adjuster The ice-clad river's glassy lustre;
adjuster Spring rays at last begin to muster
adjuster Whose turbid streams flow down and cluster
adjuster 'Archival dandies' in a cluster
adjuster And with their usual sort of bluster,
aligning The place Eugene found so confining
aligning Where one who favoured soft reclining
aligning And all the while the moon was shining
aligning And with its murky light defining
curries With jug in hand the milkmaid hurries,
curries And down he goes! The first snow flurries
bissen Rouse Tanya from her bed to listen.
bissen Can't see her fields and valleys glisten:
curried Come this way, please . . . but don't feel hurried.
adon And recollect a time that's gone?
adon Until at last her strength is gone.
adon Her breathing stops, all sense is gone.
adon But now at last his doubts were gone:
adon Can bring him back: the singer's gone,
curves On little dishes her preserves,
curves And on her covered table serves
attentive How shrewdly he could be inventive
attentive Use flattery as warm incentive,
bild Scarce out of infant clothes and killed!
bild Now doomed to wither unfulfilled!
bild The youthful lover's voice is stilled,
bild And he, alas, by friend lies killed!
apprehension I too had parted with convention,
apprehension All poets, I need hardly mention,
apprehension The poet, lost in hot contention,
apprehension Eugene, with friendly condescension,
apprehension And tell him that he's not to mention
apprehension No madrigals of mere convention
apprehension His pen breathes love, not pure invention
apprehension Concerning Olga, that he'll mention;
apprehension And apropos, I might make mention
apprehension In these odd lines of my invention
apprehension Remained beyond her comprehension,
apprehension Vladimir hasn't heart to mention
apprehension Like ancient foes in mad dissension,
apprehension But all they ever seem to mention
apprehension The princess, to his added tension,
apprehension At home receives him without tension;
apprehension An episode too slight to mention,
align My hero's features here with mine
align But I've no wish to change a line;
align I'll grant the censor's right to shine
align Revive my hopes with but a sign,
align Or halt this heavy dream of mine
align 'Who loves you more than I must sign
align And fill the page that follows mine.'
align One occupies himself with wine:
align And good and bad all intertwine.
align A bottle of some sparkling wine,
align Seclusion, quietthese, in fine,
align A contest for his crown ... or thine,
align Thou bard of Finland's maid divine!
align To shout as one: 'She's mine! She's mine!'
align All this, dear readers, meant in fine:
align I'm duelling with a friend of mine.
align I sing a youthful friend of mine.
align O Muse of Epics, may you shine
align This weary tinsel led life of mine,
align My stylish house where princes dine
admire But stop . . . Enough! My babbling lyre
admire Or all the passions they inspire;
admire Through Albion's great and haughty lyre
admire He settled where the former squire
admire Had cursed the cook in useless ire,
admire From misty Germany our squire
admire He roamed the world with singing lyre
admire The stanza fashioned by my lyre
admire And scorning then Apollo's ire
admire To humble prose I'll bend my lyre:
admire A faithful friend, a peaceful squire,
admire What fate will morning bring my lyre?
admire A gloried name; his silenced lyre
admire And thanks the Lord for ruts and mire
admire But dare not bother with my lyre
admire But why on earth does he inspire
ail A victim draped in lavish veil. . . .
abou As through the dust by post he flew,
abou Sole heir to all the kin he knew.
abou You too, you mamas, I commend you
abou Or else ... or else . . . may God defend you!
abou The old was dated through and through,
abou While nothing new was in the new;
abou Perhaps he also dimly knew
abou His aged uncle's time was due.
abou The bailiff wrote as if on cue:
abou And rather glad he was, it's true,
abou That he'd found something else to do.
abou He did respect a noble few,
abou And, cold himself, gave warmth its due.
abou A story rich in feelings too,
abou Although to us they're hardly new.
abou As men today no longer do;
abou Still love . . . because they're fated to.
abou Her portrait there; it's charming, true;
abou I liked it once no less than you,
abou The sentimental verses too,
abou To laugh a bit at something new;
abou And time would pass, till Olga'd brew
abou They'd shed a tender tear or two
abou Upon their buttercups of rue.
abou When one fine day our grandsons true
abou Straight out of life will crowd us too!
abou I fear that lingonberry brew
abou May do me in before it's through.'
abou To all this gossip; but it's true
abou Despite herself she wondered too;
abou The Corsair, or the Wandering Jew,
abou And enigmatic Sbogar too.
abou Of ancient facts and fables too
abou 'Bout evil ghosts and girls like you;
abou Tatyana's love is deep and true:
abou As sweet and trusting children do.
abou To French. . . . There's nothing I can do!
abou A lady's love, I say to you,
abou But what care I for all they do?
abou To former ways I'll still be true.
abou Where are you? Come! I bow to you
abou Have your fling, my dear ones, do!
abou That, finding my ideal in you,
abou I would have asked youyes, it's true
abou To whom will all our faults be few?
abou Who'll never bore us through and through?
abou In just such albums, friends, I too
abou Am quite as glad to write as you,
abou To trumpet, mask, and dagger too,
abou And bid us thus wise to renew
abou Ah, blest indeed . . . although it's true,
abou She may be dreaming not of you.
abou The pages of some dull review,
abou On treacherous ice in blunted shoe,
abou Is sure to fall. . . and so will you.
abou This night will pass (the next one too),
abou And grandly you'll see winter through!
abou The game of billiards, all day through,
abou With just two balls and blunted cue.
abou And of a friendly glass or two
abou In Olga's breast! What shoulders too!
abou And what a soul! . . . Come visit, do!
abou Prepared to conjure all night through,
abou The bathhouse table laid for two.
abou He waits till the mazurka's through,
abou Then asks her for the dance he's due.
abou Onegin, taking it, withdrew
abou And by the window read it through.
abou Zaretsky, pleading much to do,
abou Arose . . . and instantly withdrew.
abou The heavens sparkle now with blue;
abou The still transparent woods renew
abou You epicures and sages, you;
abou You fledglings from our Lyvshin's crew,
abou And mornings read some book right through. . . .
abou My former master lived here too;
abou Can she have found the final clue?
abou And back at home she's overdue
abou It's time that she were settled too,
abou I swear I don't know what to do;
abou Your Grandison?' ' I never knew . . .
abou Oh, Grandison! ... of course I do!'
abou So short a time since I baptized you!' '
abou 'And since my gingerbread surprised you!'
abou Is just as meek and deaf, it's true,
abou And still consumes enough for two.
abou To show their gall. . . and waistcoats too,
abou With negligent lorgnettes in view.
abou And Moscow countless beauties too;
abou Than all her friends in heaven's blue;
abou To classicism I've been true:
abou The foreword's here, if overdue.
abou So harsh and negative a view?
abou Of censuring what others do?
abou No matter what he tries to do;
abou In public speaks a word or two,
abou He's urged to seek his doctors' view,
abou And these suggest a spa or two.
abou Lest monde or husband misconstrue
abou The tale that my Onegin knew ....
abou He even read some Russians too,
abou Nor did he scorn the odd review
abou I daresay better-looking too,
abou But what did I then find in you?
abou For all those haunts that I once knew . . .
abou Where first, Onegin, I saw you;
abou In opening my soul to you?
abou Perhaps I give occasion to!
abou And I'm deprived of this; for you
abou Each day is dear, each moment too!
abou You've found at least a crumb or two.
abou But all at once for good withdrew
abou As I from my Onegin do.
bicker Not once all day does thought but flicker,
bicker The heart no cause to beat the quicker;
bueche Her same old spouse, and same old pooch
abhors No spot of ink on oaken floors.
abhors Onegin opened cupboard doors
amended And now at last the wait has ended;
amended Then gave it up and finally ended
amended Outside the door of his intended.
amended Can it be true, my heyday's ended
amended (As I in jest so oft pretended)?
amended This tiring trek through town extended
amended Nearby St Chariton's it ended
alamillo Asleep till morn beneath her pillow;
bas-relief The way to master rampant grief;
bas-relief A final and complete relief.
bas-relief Prepared in trials or in grief
bas-relief To render service, give relief;
bas-relief And proved unfaithful to her grief.
bas-relief Or brings her smothered tears relief;
bas-relief Her heart is rent in two by grief.
beijing's Has overpraised these haughty things:
beijing's They're hardly worth the songs one sings
beijing's The charm of gravely simple things,
beijing's And youthful hopes on youthful wings.
beijing's Of choral dances, garden swings.
beijing's Vladimir's stormy soul grew wings;
beijing's But Olga didn't read the things.
adverse And with her wrinkled hand the nurse
adverse Then crossed the girl and mumbled verse.
adverse Bewitched by moonlight's magic curse. . .
adverse 'I'd be alone now . . . leave me, nurse.
adverse There's no absurdity or worse,
adverse Nor any vulgar gutter verse,
adverse To mar the fleeting page with verse;
adverse For other, colder dreams I nurse,
adverse Is incoherent rot, or worse;
advise For forty years had heaved his sighs,
advise Stared out the window, and squashed flies.
advise That friendly hands would surely rise
advise To shatter slander's cup of lies;
advise While everywhere before your eyes
advise Your fateful tempter's figure lies.
advise She takes a garden path and sighs,
advise She can't go on, she shuts her eyes;
advise Her ears resound with ringing cries,
advise And sparkles dance before her eyes.
advise By turns Tatyana groans and sighs.
advise Upon her fevered tongue and dries.
advise They're people whom we're bound to prize,
advise The guests all stare in mute surprise;
advise Poor Lensky can't believe his eyes.
advise Corrupt her youthful heart with lies,
advise With fiery praise . . . and heated sighs;
advise On breast and falls. His misted eyes
advise Thus, slowly, down a sloping rise,
advise And as she reads, a tear will rise
advise And softly dim her gentle eyes.
advise Shall I return?' And Tanya sighs,
advise As tears well up to dim her eyes.
advise Where every day before his eyes
advise A bloody spectre seemed to rise;
advise And ill at ease, he scarcely tries
advise To answer her. His mind supplies
advise His stricken, sick, extinguished eyes,
advise Imploring aspect, mute replies
advise To arm my gaze and speech with lies:
advise to look at you with cheerful eyes
betel To help those pies and beefsteaks settle,
betel And so, for all his fiery mettle,
betel At green-baize tables players settle,
betel Call out for men to try their mettle:
betel Now streams of greyish powder settle
acuff 'I've suffered ballets long enough,
acuff But now Didelot is boring stuff.'
acuff And nature's made of wayward stuff
acuff The charming sex is light as fluff.
abounds Or arm in arm they make their rounds
abounds Each morning through the park and grounds.
abounds Good Petushkv, to Olga bounds;
arrived Our Lensky's seat, there lived and thrived
arose The double carriage lamps in rows
arose Pour forth their warm and cheerful glows
arose As n in French . . . and through the nose;
arose But soon she dropped her city pose:
arose Our mighty tongue, God only knows,
arose Has still not mastered postal prose.
arose Alone upon his way he goes
arose And does not heed my present woes.
arose Its happy rights ... as grand as those
arose That high and mighty Moscow knows.
arose And quickly blamed him, heaven knows!
arose Good friends no less than ardent foes
arose Poor Tanya burns in joyless throes;
arose Sleep shuns her bed, all sweetness goes,
arose Does Olga's Lensky thus compose;
arose Or sparkling wit as cold as prose;
arose And filled with truth's own vivid glows
arose A stream of elegies then flows.
arose But I'll be mute. I don't propose
arose To bring two centuries to blows.
arose The fields are silver where they froze . . .
arose Expect the rhyme, so take it Rose!)
barish My dear one, you are doomed to perish;
i Malk-Adhl and de Linr,
i By clumps of snow; and through the summits
i As your dear waist, my sweet Zizi,
i Madame de Stal, Bichat, Tissot.
adl-tabatabai While thinking under every sigh:
adl-tabatabai The devil take you, Uncle. Die!'
adl-tabatabai And there, where southern waves break high,
adl-tabatabai Beneath my Africa's warm sky,
adl-tabatabai Off where the grass grows dense and high,
adl-tabatabai And 'neath the misty moon on high
adl-tabatabai An idle stillness rules the sky,
adl-tabatabai And there where now his ashes lie
adl-tabatabai A tombstone tells the passer-by:
adl-tabatabai Young Lensky came to cast an eye
adl-tabatabai And mourned his ashes with a sigh.
adl-tabatabai As down the shortest road they fly;
adl-tabatabai And use a furtive ear to spy.
adl-tabatabai Vladimir gave a curt reply
adl-tabatabai And let the conversation die.
adl-tabatabai But there beneath the Finnish sky,
adl-tabatabai Amid those mournful crags on high,
adl-tabatabai Another fruitless day went by.
adl-tabatabai Tatyana waits: will he reply?
adl-tabatabai With wicked grin or solemn eye
adl-tabatabai To judge the wit with which I lie.
adl-tabatabai One aims a gun at ducks on high;
adl-tabatabai One is entranced by rhyme as I;
adl-tabatabai To help the rural day go by?
adl-tabatabai When only bareness greets the eye.
adl-tabatabai That held her heart, she knew not why)
adl-tabatabai The Russian winter passing by:
adl-tabatabai Or if upon her left she'd spy
adl-tabatabai A waxing crescent moon on high,
adl-tabatabai Or when a shooting star flew by
adl-tabatabai In fiery dust before her eye,
adl-tabatabai She flits on tiptoe with a sigh
adl-tabatabai And asks the stranger passing by,
adl-tabatabai Poor Tanya's plight; but every eye
adl-tabatabai To sizing up a lavish pie
adl-tabatabai Could gull a fool, and had an eye
adl-tabatabai For all to see, or on the sly;
adl-tabatabai And cutting off Eugene's reply,
adl-tabatabai Presented him, with gloating eye,
adl-tabatabai A pistol, cocked and lifted high,
adl-tabatabai To aim at temple or at thigh.
adl-tabatabai Too deaf and still to make reply
adl-tabatabai To your repeated, desperate cry?
adl-tabatabai This swirling swamp in which we lie
adl-tabatabai And wallow, friends, both you and I!
adl-tabatabai And, scarce alive, cried out goodbye.
adl-tabatabai But Tanya found she couldn't cry;
adl-tabatabai Though not without a heartfelt sigh,
adl-tabatabai Tatyana turns to say goodbye,
adl-tabatabai Out to the open fields to sigh;
adl-tabatabai The world she loves and says goodbye:
adl-tabatabai To talk once more and say goodbye.
adl-tabatabai But quickly summer seems to fly,
adl-tabatabai And mileposts soothe the idle eye
adl-tabatabai As fence like they go flashing by.
adl-tabatabai And with one voice the grannies cry:
adl-tabatabai 'Good gracious, how the years do fly!'
adl-tabatabai To strut their stuff and thunder by,
adl-tabatabai To dazzle, conquer . . . and to fly.
adl-tabatabai Old women beamed as she went by;
adl-tabatabai And sought in vain to catch her eye;
adl-tabatabai The London social sets decry
adl-tabatabai As vulgar. (I won't even try
adl-tabatabai Your solemn gaze may only spy
adl-tabatabai And I can hear your stern reply.
adl-tabatabai The time to quit the feast and fly,
adl-tabatabai Who never drained life's chalice dry,
aflutter A careless drawl, a tiny stutter,
aflutter Can still produce a lovely flutter
amends In pale blue shafts from chimney ends.
amends With vain pursuit of worldly ends;
amends I liked his ways and we made friends.
amends Dearest hearts and darling friends,
amends Unmindful too of town or friends
amends And their dull means to festive ends.
amends And so estranged these former friends?
amends Share meals and pastimes, thoughts and ends?
arousing The balls go in each bevelled housing.
abstain A novel in the older vein
basim's While Iso long ago it seems!
basim's Have drawn from love abundant themes;
basim's Oh, by the way, Dame Larin seems
basim's Within a book her heart's extremes,
basim's His cold, embittered mind that seems
basim's To waste itself in empty schemes.
basim's But now! . . . What unbecoming schemes
befuddled I'm old; my mind ... it does get muddled.
aglitter The theatre's full, the boxes glitter;
aglitter And on the snow make rainbows glitter.
aglitter Let not the poet's soul grow bitter
aglitter Amid this world's deceptive glitter,
alludes One craves the scent that war exudes;
advertised The one she feared, the one she prized
abstention Tatyana's soul. His true intention
abstention And now, malignant in intention,
bence Through force of passion and of sense,
bence Some raved or lied, and some were dense;
bence Some lacked all conscience; some, all sense;
bence Would listen with a look intense,
bence Although he seldom saw their sense.
bence But man of honour and of sense.
bence Though on the whole he saw no sense
bence In missives writ in love's defence
adrienne And picture truly with my pen
adrienne He locked himself within his den
adrienne And, with a yawn, took up his pen
adrienne To feed the critics' hungry pen.
adrienne Fly to the Neva's water then,
adrienne And pain has made us humble men
adrienne We sometimes like to listen then
adrienne And so you're off. . . forgive me then.
adrienne But tell me Lensky, how and when
adrienne But lead them to the altar then.
adrienne The youthful lover with his yen
adrienne Could say a word to you; and then,
adrienne Pelting him with cherries then,
adrienne Was sleeping soundly even then.
adrienne To close one eye and, only then,
adrienne To take his aim. . . . And that was when
adrienne From old Anisya. Next day then,
adrienne I thought she might accept him then;
adrienne Or even Demon of my pen!
adrienne Vexation? Pride? Or youth's old yen
adrienne Much bolder than most healthy men,
adrienne He chose with trembling hand to pen
adrienne Had seized him by the collar then,
adrienne And locked him in a darkened den.
adrienne I used to meet with now and then:
adrienne To lose my hateful freedom then.
arresting O when, my soul, with waves contesting,
arresting I scare a flock of ducks from resting;
arresting Poor Lensky! In his place of resting,
arresting Did he, sad bard, awake protesting
anticrime Until Breguet's unsleeping chime
anticrime Reminds him that it's dinner time.
anticrime Its want of purpose is a crime;
anticrime Whereas the ode has aims sublime.
anticrime When off beside my lake I climb
anticrime Beset with yearning and with rhyme
anticrime Should they not laugh while yet there's time,
anticrime Before their hands are stained with crime?
anticrime And early church bells when they chime,
anticrime Announcing dawn and working time
anticrime And blest who ripened in his prime;
anticrime The chill of life with passing time;
anticrime Came close to grasping at that time
anticrime The principles of Russian rhyme.
anticrime Relief from labours for a time,
anticrime Live images, or wit in rhyme,
condors Childe Harold-like, Onegin ponders,
bridal A dinner fanciful and idle,
alfaro And I confess (in public sorrow)
alfaro Bard of The Feasts and languid sorrow,
alfaro Tatyana's favourite. Now when sorrow
alfaro While I, perhaps, descend in sorrow
alfaro We'll show your Tanya. What a sorrow
around To wash those sizzling cutlets down;
around The brand new ballet's on in town!
around And took at last to coming down
around In just her cap and quilted gown.
around And bids us cast away the crown
around And to our rhyming guild calls down:
around As heaven's galaxy shines down
around Tatyana, in her low-cut gown,
around The pines in all their beauty frown
around And barely stir, all weighted down
around Zartskyonce a rowdy clown,
around Chief gambler and arch rake in town,
around If with your pistol you'd struck down
around A bold reply, too blunt a frown,
around Buyanov tried: she turned him down.
around Pykhtin the lancer came from town
around Eye Tanya with a priggish frown,
around Among themselves they put her down.
around On misty eves, she led me down
around For loathesomeness of soul - a clown,
around In album drawings all through town.
benasuli I ask you now to tell me truly,
benasuli You poets who have sinned unduly:
benasuli Or where the husband, knowing truly
benasuli Her worth (yet cursing fate unduly)
benasuli And happy, he'd have learned life truly;
benasuli And so decayed, until he duly
acceding And then by post Eugene was speeding,
acceding Lord Byron, his caprice succeeding,
acceding Then rage or drink. . . . Somehow proceeding,
abound A laid-out corpse was what he found,
abound Prepared as tribute for the ground.
abound And cleared the darkened mind she found.
abound Of feeling, thought, and magic sound.
abound But then their charming wives he found
abound At talk were even less profound.
abound Until at last the husband found
abound Through which he entered, newly crowned.
abound In all the cups; without a sound
abound Nor does his horn at midday sound
abound The call that brings them gathering round.
abound Come flitting, flicking, swirling round
abound To fall like stars upon the ground.
abound Her slender form; fierce cackles sound
abound In savage glee; all eyes turn round,
abound The glasses jingle and resound.
abound Young life's own whirlwind, full of sound,
abound The rousing waltz goes whirling round.
abound Surprised next morning when he found,
abound Zaretsky had again called round;
abound The spring with which our honour's wound!
abound The god that makes this world go round!
abound Against the ramrods mallets pound.
abound The first sharp hammer clicks resound.
abound Passed on in bed ... his children round,
abound While women wept and doctors frowned.
abound Of briar blooms, and freshets sound.
abound There too a tombstone can be found
abound Throughout our native Russian ground.
abound About this unknown belle he'd found.
abound He just moved off. . . . He's turning round.'
abound 'That heavy general?' Tanya frowned.
abound To hear the sea's incessant sound,
abound Turn meadows into marshy ground
abound And strip the forest bare all round.
deployment Or seek some other sweet employment:
deployment And was it not in past enjoyment
bickett The grove, the hill, the field, the thicket
d Some mornings still abed he drowses,
d Along a street that gently drowses,
d Brought up in Oriental splendour,
d But what of my Eugene? Half drowsing,
d Each with a different dogma girded;
d Their freedom for his honour's splendour;
d At Shrovetide feasts their table flourished
d For my sad lot its share of splendour
d Why, I can picture theminspired,
d 'The mail has kept him evidently.'
d As artless as the one you tendered;
d That your good friend won't find delightful,
d To honour, love, and idolize,
d One dreams of ruling multitudes;
d But suddenly a snowbank shifted,
d And who emerged when it was lifted?
d Set to a children's melody:
d Rveillez-vous, belle endormie
d But tea is brought: the girls demurely
d The greatest hall when it resounded,
d And turned coquette! A fickle toddler!
d And as he bid the girl goodnight,
d The gleaming pistols wake from drowsing.
d Was like a blow. Onegin shuddered,
d In time he might have changed profoundly,
d Have quit the Muses, married soundly;
d Not far from where the youth once flourished
d The darling sister whom she'd nourished,
d His riding crop. And on she wended.
d The desk, the lamp that stands unlighted,
d Farewell, fond nature, where I flourished!
d Ah, Moscow! How that sound is freighted
d She sits before the windowsill.
d But all the while, as Tanya pondered,
d The aunts exchanged a wink and nodded,
d And with an elbow each one prodded
d Forgetting, then, the city's splendour,
d Her bow was calm and dignified.
d He found he couldn't. She enquired
d Where first our novel's plot unfolded?
d He left the rout in all its splendour
d And, gazing at the moon, she'd nourished
d He spends each day and night tormented
d And plunging into deep despond,
d A country house ... a windowsill. . .
d He quit one sparkling morn and sprinted
d Beside the road the sunlight glinted.
d 'To me, Onegin, all these splendours,
d What's more: poor guiltless Lensky perished,
d How wrong I've been! And how tormented!
d A sudden clink of spurs rings loudly,
d As Tanya's husband enters proudly
bihm Theocritus and Homer bored him,
bihm But reading Adam Smith restored him,
bihm What clever traps he'd set before him!
bihm And how his wicked tongue would gore him!
bihm Could not conceive how solemn Grimm
bihm Dared clean his nails in front of him,
bihm She trembles, burns, and waits ... so near him!
bihm But will he come? . . . She doesn't hear him.
bihm But only one bright image holds him,
bihm One thought within his heart enfolds him:
bihm But sleep had hardly come to take him
bihm His neighbour, calling out to wake him:
bihm My poor, poor Lensky! Yes, she mourned him;
bihm Alas! His fiance has scorned him
bihm Sees her at once! Her harshness stuns him!
bihm Without a word the lady shuns him!
afflik But disenchanted just as quick,
afflik Of all desire at length grown sick,
goupil The room where fashion's model pupil
cooled And barred from being loved ... or fooled!
antique You've been invited there next week!'
alive The actual things that make it thrive,
alive And why for gold it need not strive,
alive The happiness for which I live.'
displeasure To stroll about at total leisure,
displeasure You too, young mistresses of leisure,
displeasure Adorned the course of rural leisure
displeasure Quite pampered by a life of leisure,
bogue A lexicon of words in vogue . . .
bogue Mere parody and just a rogue?
abbatiello Monsieur l'Abb, a needy fellow,
abbatiello His views on morals ever mellow,
abbatiello Her father was a kindly fellow
abbatiello Lost in a past he found more mellow;
abbatiello Hm, hm, dear reader, feeling mellow?
abbatiello Perhaps you'd like, you gentle fellow,
abbatiello The Harlikvs were feeling mellow
abbatiello Late from Tambov, a witty fellow
beating Might hear you speak a friendly greeting,
beating Of but one thing, till our next meeting.
beating But what ensued from Tanya's meeting?
beating The latter, hard upon first greeting,
beating The poet's note about a 'meeting'.
beating Or sometimes merely bows on meeting,
beating Or passes by without a greeting:
bentz Its noisy feasts and grand events,
bentz And visited the humble tents
blurry How early he could stir or worry
blurry 'Ah me, these poets . . . such a hurry!'
blurry 'Well, I won't keep you, have no worry,
blurry 'Oh, nurse, a favour, please . . , and hurry!'
blurry 'You mustn't think . . . and please don't worry . . .
blurry The fall that year was in no hurry,
blurry Onegin, dressing in a flurry,
blurry Instructs his man as well to hurry:
blurry You too, indulgent reader, hurry
blurry To leave the city with its flurry,
bindel Extinguished ashes won't rekindle,
bindel Within my soul will fade and dwindle:
assemble How early on he could dissemble,
assemble Compel belief, or make her tremble,
assemble I've faith in you and do not tremble;
assemble I love you (why should I dissemble?);
busch's To glance behind her; on she pushes
affronts The host of girls on marriage hunts
about He enters cork and bottle spout!
about The comet wine comes gushing out,
about And while the lamps both in and out
about Naively poured his secrets out;
about And tears her golden earrings out;
about The band of goblins, putting out
about And Lensky too; a light shines out;
about Onegin lifts an arm to rout
about But no one hears his neighbour out;
about All laugh and argue, squeal and shout.
about At forty he'd have had the gout,
about Have eaten, drunk, grown bored and stout,
about Her stricken face. When all came out
about The time will come without a doubt
about An inn at every stage en route.
about And to each mad and fevered rout
about With banal ladies, men who shout,
antismoking I'll see this Phyllis so provoking
antismoking Present me, do.'' You must be joking!'
boldly The flirt will always reason coldly;
boldly 'Approach at will!' Advancing coldly,
afternoon A simple and affecting tune,
afternoon As infant slumber, as the moon
afternoon But then their friendship grew, and soon
afternoon All ancient folklore night and noon,
afternoon And read the future by the moon.
afternoon A rogue and gossip night and noon,
afternoon A glutton, grafter, and buffoon.
afternoon The cattle low; and by the moon
afternoon The nightingale pours forth its tune.
chryseis I'm sure you've known provincial misses;
chryseis At times the fresh and youthful kisses
abdul (Faublas' disciple and his tool),
abdul As did the skeptical old fool,
berges Once more imagination surges,
berges Once more that touch ignites and urges
berges The wayward fits, the final surges,
berges Have all become mere comic urges,
berges Begins to fade. The vale emerges
berges The shepherd's pipe resounds and urges
berges Along a forest road he surges,
berges And then, mid trees, a hut emerges;
absolut And captures worldly fame to boot!
absolut But I, in love, was dense and mute.
absolut Is always angry, sullen, mute
absolut A coldly jealous, selfish brute!
absolut We've got to have forbidden fruit,
absolut Or Eden's joys for us are moot.
absolut And vibrant life in taking root
absolut Sends forth rich blooms and gives sweet fruit.
blouses What? Invitations? Yes, three houses
blouses Before the fronts of darkened houses,
blouses And so I offer, worthy spouses,
blouses My services to save your houses:
abusive She isn't hurried or obtrusive,
attains But where he now no longer reigns . . .
bocian My deep respect for your emotion,
bocian Your trusting soul. . . and sweet devotion.
bocian Had Lensky known the deep emotion
bocian Or had Tatyana had some notion
bocian Remembers him; his bride's devotion
bocian And he recalled with grim emotion,
bocian Pursued him through the world's commotion,
bocian 'Back thenfar off from vain commotion,
bocian You had no use for my devotion . . .
abed Already bored, to uncle's bed,
abed And distant lands where once he'd shed
abed His living tears upon the bed
abed Then supper came, then time for bed,
abed And off the guests would drive, well fed.
abed Whose cordial hand shall then be led
abed Beside the tender maiden's bed,
abed And I confess, from them I fled,
abed And, sighing, started home for bed;
abed The girlish hopes on which I fed,
abed Contented with the life I led.
abed Majestic wigs and heels of red.
abed The days grew short and as they sped,
abed The wood with mournful murmur shed
abed The mysteries of the marriage bed
abed His Blackie seated on the sled,
abed She just undressed and went to bed.
abed With apprehensive step . . . then fled!
abed The bear just followed where she led.
abed And lays her on a makeshift bed,
abed By everyone. Eugene has fled
abed And driven home alone to bed.
abed And sometimes he himself got bled
abed The panes chalked white. The owner's fled;
abed His very memory now has fled
abed Before the window on the bed,
abed A stable, fence, and kitchen shed.
abed The language of the gods she shed
abed Sweet talk with friends, on which I've fed.
abed Oh, many, many days have fled
bowcan My life till now has been a token
bowcan And in your coming, God has spoken,
bowcan There's no one here to whom I've spoken,
bowcan Believe me (conscience be your token):
berls And then the other slowly twirls,
berls And now she leaps! And now she whirls!
beginner But he was wrong; that idle sinner
beginner But now the shades of night grow thinner,
adolescent And sang of childhood effervescent,
austerely An honest man who'd served sincerely,
austerely I've looked it over most severely;
austerely To Lovelace Grandison, but merely
austerely He trusted all she did sincerely
austerely The guests all treated so sincerely;
austerely Well, thus am I. And was it merely
austerely Has been decreed. I may have merely
ator But that will do. My beauty's letter
ator Retracting it would suit me better.
ator But having read Tatyana's letter,
ator The princess an impassioned letter.
ator (And with good cause!), he found it better
becoming What's that... the crunching snow . . . who's coming?!
becoming Her voice more soft than reed pipe's humming:
becoming But look, the crowd's astir and humming;
becoming The hostess sees a lady coming,
chelf Against the rampart's granite shelf,
chelf (As once some poet drew himself).
bevels Bacchante-like, at all our revels,
bevels The young pursued my Muse like devils;
bean's But one long string of dreary scenes
bean's No sapient truths, no pretty scenes
apiece The caravan of cackling geese
'course And cursing woman's crooked course,
'course He leaves abruptly, calls for horse,
'course When headlong and alone on horse
'course She races down the meadow course,
'course Bring out your own or rent a horse,
'course And far from town now set your course!
'course No funds on renting fresher horse,
'course Which meant a longer trip of course;
brightly She laced her corset very tightly,
brightly Pronounced a Russian n as slightly
brightly It fizzes, foams, and bubbles lightly
brightly 'Come warm yourself,' he adds politely,
brightly You mourn the poet, friends . . . and rightly:
brightly Will draw her leather reins up tightly
brightly The plain inscription, skimming lightly;
brightly And drowsy nature, smiling lightly,
ab It's time to quit this dreary lee
ab Small hamlets too the eye could see
ab Thus people so it seems to me
ab And thus preserved by fate's decree,
ab So round and fair of face is she,
ab She's like that stupid moon you see,
ab Perhaps, my friends, by fate's decree,
ab When some new demon seizes me;
ab Put up the window ... sit by me.'
ab Come tell me how it used to be.'
ab We'd never heard of love, you see.
ab Would just have been the death of me!'
ab Tatyana's letter lies beside me,
ab I read it with an ache inside me
ab Her brimming eyes could hardly see.
ab They're closer . . . coming here . . . it's he!
ab O God, what must he think of me!
ab A misty dream of what might be.
ab (An edict that was meant, you see,
ab To keep sly mouths from feeling free
ab And then the dream came true for me!
ab And in my heart I cried: It's he!
ab Their quartos to be signed by me,
ab I tremble with malicious glee;
ab The frigid, yawning days to be,
ab He never pictured once, not he.
ab Plus Marmontel just volume three.
ab Martyn Zadck soon came to be
ab Fair crystal of my soul and key
ab More pleasant yet, my friends, if he
ab Shrieks out in stupid shock: that's me!
ab The years to solemn prose incline me;
ab The years chase playful rhyme behind me,
ab As I must now admit, I see.
ab My sparkling youth, before you flee!
ab Oh, where and why do I now flee?
ab And what does Fate prepare for me?'
ab And there the Muse spread out for me
ab A feast of youthful fancies free,
ab His eyes retain their stare; but she
ab Sits unconstrained, quite calm and free.
ab In that brief instant then, who couldn't
ab And in the princess then, who wouldn't
ab Or through the magic crystal see
ab My novel's shape or what would be.
bildt You gorgeous albums stamped with gilt,
bildt And racks where modish rhymesters wilt,
abeles And ever faster on she reels;
abeles That shaggy footman at her heels! . . .
abeles And claps salute him. Tanya feels
abeles Constrained to curtsey . . . almost reels.
abeles A stately general at her heels.
m When one becomes the butt of rumour,
am Another round would hardly hurt them,
am But now the chime and watch alert them:
am Of writerswhom I won't condemn
am Since, after all, I'm one of them.
am Across from Tanya there they place them;
am She cannot raise her eyes to face them
am Or else he'd patch things up between them
am And later secretly demean them
am A grizzled Kalmuk came to meet them;
am She called from parlour couch to greet them.
covers She wanders with her borrowed lovers
covers And hasn't stirred; still slumber hovers
assembling The music's roar, the ballroom trembling,
conserved And at their table guests were served
conserved By rank in turn as each deserved.
aggressions Alone amid his new possessions,
aggressions Eugene devised a few concessions
arnaz In russet wig and fine pince-nez.
abyss But you, you men in wedded bliss,
abyss You stayed his friends despite all this:
abyss No maiden's lips were equal bliss,
abyss No rosy cheek that I might kiss,
abyss Of shaded, idle times like this,
abyss I spent my days of deepest bliss?
abyss Thus heaven's gift to us is this:
abyss That habit takes the place of bliss.
abyss And summon forth a sombre bliss,
abyss You learn life's sweetness . . . feel its kiss,
abyss Her cherished trove of tears and bliss
abyss She'll share with none, aloud like this.
beaming His strangeness that was more than seeming,
agreeing He who has lived as thinking being
agreeing He who can feel is always fleeing
agreeing And loathes this world with all her being;
ambrosian But who is that among the chosen,
ambrosian That figure standing mute and frozen,
bridge's And even part whole mountain ridges;
awoke And then Eugene approached and spoke:
awoke I've read your words and they evoke
awoke An empty phantom or a joke,
book Within a cool and leafy nook.
book The busy master never took
book Where Lensky with his pawn once took,
book Bemused and muddled, his own rook.
book Or judge yourself how it must look
book And in exchange he also took
book And noting how poor Tanya shook,
book He barely hid his angry look
book That momentary tender look,
book With Olga all confused and shook
book There too, within a shaded nook,
book A distant and secluded nook
adjourning Vladimir Lensky, just returning
adjourning Her bosom heaves, her cheeks are burning,
adjourning 'For dreams and youth there's no returning;
adjourning Possesses me on spring's returning,
adjourning As with old friends, she keeps returning
adjourning In what new guise is he returning?
bliley They all began to gossip slyly,
bliley To joke and comment (rather wryly);
bliley And here's an envoy speaking slyly
bliley Who joked both cleverly and wryly
abron I have of old relied upon
abron The lakeway path, the wood; and on
abron When we lure the fellow on,
abron Old age divines with glasses on
abron 'Oh, what's your name?' He hurries on,
abron She runs . . . but he keeps crashing on . . .
abron Just picks her up and rushes on;
abron 'It's time to rise! Past six . . . come on!
e And pass him medicines morosely
e He did possess the happy forte
e The ways in which a state progresses
e What casual letters he would send her!
e To conquer youthful virtue's meekness
e So pleased with all he had in life:
e Himself, his dinner, and his wife.
e Have asked him to a grand soire.
e While all those cupids, devils, serpents
e Whatever clever London offers
e At least three hours he peruses
e In current fashions of toilette,
e While past its glassed-in windows flitter
e You were the first that he forswore;
e On top of which, they're so unerring,
e He crammed his bookshelf overflowing,
e And caped in storms, shall I go questing
e And spleen, he saw, would dog his life,
e Like shadow or a faithful wife.
e For country calm and lack of strife;
e My fertile fancies spring to life.
e And far niente rules my leisures:
e Why no one, friends, as God's my witness,
e For I have known too well the witless
e His soul still knew the warm effusion
e Its time will pass without my knife,
e So let him meanwhile live his life
e The grave's eternal, fateful mystery,
e And sighed, recalling their interment.
e Today, though, all we see in her
e She never touched a fragile finger
e To thread a needle, wouldn't linger
e Repeats what mama taught to her.
e About her clothes one couldn't fault her;
e 'Twas only habit then that taught her
e And soon a great discovery brought her
e She'd drive around to check the workers,
e She kept the books, she shaved the shirkers,
e By children and by faithful wife
e Far more than some who part this life.
e He destined Olga for my wife
e And used to say: "Oh grant me, life,
e Some future dunce with warm effusion
e Perceives herself as heroine
e Cloaked even hopeless egotism
e I'll cease one day to be a poet
e A sudden faintness comes upon her,
e The letter trembles in her fingers;
e The rosy sealing wafer lingers
e Tatyana by the window lingers
e Begins to trace with lovely fingers
e Just so a butterfly both quivers
e And made me thine for evermore!
e The less we love her when we woo her,
e And thus more surely we undo her
e Drops in for whist and joins routinely;
e To fall asleep at home serenely;
e Her maiden dreams had helped unfetter
e To bind with family ties my life;
e That I turn father, take a wife;
e Than homes in which the wretched wife
e Alone both day and night through life;
e And showed poor Tanya when he freed her
e Abused him roundly, used the knife.
e Now every man has foes in life,
e Is bound by any righteous wife
e To be respected in this life;
e The neighbours shake their heads morosely
e A Venus temple, graves and greenery;
e Or else (and here I'm far from jesting),
e He'd swim across this Hellespont;
e Catching the scent, the road horse quivers
e And here's a household boy gone sleighing
e Clandestine rides in dashing sleighs;
e All signs and portents quite alarmed her,
e All objects either scared or charmed her
e Then this was certain sign to her
e She dare not look to see behind her,
e At every turn he seems to find her,
e There is no path; the gorge that plummets,
e And now another tries to trip her,
e She lets it lie, she mustn't linger,
e To lift her skirt with trembling finger;
e She lies within his arms inertly;
e On coming to, she looks around her:
e The clink of glasses, shouts . . . confound her,
e Huge horns and bony fingers swerving
e Onegin snatches up a knife,
e A rending cry amid the strife
e Reverberates ... the cabin quivers;
e What clues the index can afford her:
e And brings in merry mood before her
e Kibitkas, britzkas, coaches, sleighs.
e Has come and brought his portly wife;
e Whose peasants lead a wretched life;
e And brought along Monsieur Triquet,
e Inside her, stormy passion's seething;
e Tatyana's scarce alive; Triquet,
e My bold Buynov guides expertly
e Gvozdin, Buynov, Petushkov
e Why murmur vainly? He can't give
e Breeds ducks and geese, and oversees
e 'It's up to me,' he thought, 'to save her.
e And mid the hum and hush of life,
e They haunt my soul with dreams of strife.
e A pack of barking dogs chased round her;
e Came rushing quickly to surround her.
e And on those pages everywhere
e Tatyana heard the news morosely
e And Christendom will institute
e All innocence, their talk progresses .
e One melancholy joker found her
e His 'true ideal' and hovered round her
e Once Vyzemsky sat down beside her
e And some old man when he espied her
e No jealous lady trained lorgnette,
e The night has countless stars to light her,
e Tatyana looks with eyes unseeing
e In days when I still bloomed serenely
e To show my Muse a grand soire;
e Without position, work, or wife
e Could find no purpose for his life.
e Is neither cold nor too effusive;
e The ladies flocked to stand beside her;
e The men bowed lower when they spied her
e Young maidens hushed in passing by her;
e For this delicious epithet;
e A curious and keen lorgnette
e 'Well then, come on . . . we'll go and meet her.'
e And so the prince led up to greet her
e Eugene and he recalled the jesting,
e And lures us to the tree of mystery:
e He's happy just to be around her,
e To part the footmen who surround her
e Those journals where each modern Moses
e E sempre bene, gentlemen.
e Vague threats and rumours, premonitions;
e He sees a youth, quite still, reposing
e Her gaze upon his face still lingers;
e Does not withdraw impassive fingers
e 'Onegin, I was then much younger,
e And loved you with a girlish hunger;
e Your frigid glance . . . that sermonette! . . .
e To burn and with the mind each minute,
e But I am now another's wife,
e And I'll be faithful all my life.'
anandeep I read a little, often sleep,
anandeep For fleeting fame I do not weep.
anandeep By snowy blizzards buried deep.
anandeep Has lulled her wretchedness to sleep:
anandeep A lancer has enthralled her deep,
anandeep Will stride in broadly arching sweep;
anandeep We'll dig bold tunnels 'neath the deep
beamer That idle and reclusive schemer,
abhor Until he had no means for more.
abhor Still sleeps on furs at carriage door;
abhor Upon the ballroom's mirrored floor,
abhor Or perched on granite by the shore.
abhor The social buzz became a bore,
abhor Were objects of his thought no more.
abhor The manner grand can only bore.
abhor Quite ceased to tempt him any more
abhor And, presently, induced a snore;
abhor And now, my friends, I hear once more
abhor That question you have put before:
abhor And though I grieve, I weep no more;
abhor And soon, quite soon, the tempest's core
abhor And all we've learned from its great store
abhor Is affectation — nothing more.
abhor But which today I use no more.
abhor Perhaps along the Neva's shore
abhor You too have known such belles before.
abhor Those objects of your verse . . . and more,
abhor Her health, her calm, the smile she wore
abhor Like empty sounds exist no more,
abhor On "former days" and "times of yore";
abhor Enough now! Sing of something more!'
abhor They flap their wings and fly from shore.
abhor And then waxed voluble once more
abhor In talk of Olga. Love's a bore!
abhor Each year they promised, as before,
abhor Then pushes straightway through the door
abhor And lays her down upon the floor.
abhor And glances slyly through the door.
abhor Turns curious to see still more
abhor And pushes slightly on the door. . . .
abhor And strikes his chair against the floor;
abhor All rise; he marches to the door.
abhor Then Olga pushes through the door,
abhor More rosy than the dawn before
abhor The feet of ladies known before.
abhor In your slim tracks I'll stray no more,
abhor Ah, then, perhaps, the love she bore
abhor Might well have made them friends once more!
abhor To drive the body home once more.
abhor Sensing the dreadful load they bore,
abhor By feelings and perturbed no more,
abhor His world a closed and silent door?
abhor Burns even stronger than before,
abhor Of faraway Eugene the more.
abhor The snow, his wife, and much, much more.
abhor Who ruled the queenly Neva's shore.
abhor Alas! We humans all ignore
abhor To write again . . . and then once more
abhor To some soire . . . and by the door,
abhor Behind his silent study door,
abhor How wicked spleen had once before
abhor The simple girl he'd known before,
abhor Who'd dreamt and loved, was born once more.
augmented Then tossed about and seemed demented;
augmented And settled down and grew contented.
augmented By Tolstoy's magic brush, and scented
augmented Although the book she read presented
augmented No lines a poet had invented,
augmented Alas! it's true: Eugene's demented,
augmented Estranged from men and discontented,
